The Project Gutenberg eBook of Report on the Migration of Birds in the
Spring and Autumn of 1882, by John A. Harvie Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring and Autumn of 1882
       Fourth Report, 1882.

Author: John A. Harvie Brown
        John Cordeaux
        R. M. Barrington
        A. G. More

Release Date: June 5, 2021 [eBook #65515]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Tom Cosmas compiled from files made freely available at The
             Internet Archive and placed in the Public Domain.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT ON THE MIGRATION OF BIRDS
IN THE SPRING AND AUTUMN OF 1882 ***



Transcriber Note

Text emphasis is denoted as _Italics_.




                   REPORT ON THE MIGRATION OF BIRDS


                         FOURTH REPORT, 1882.


                                LONDON:

           PRINTED BY WEST, NEWMAN & CO., 54, HATTON GARDEN

                                 1883.



                         Price Two Shillings.




                                REPORT

                                ON THE

                          MIGRATION OF BIRDS

                                IN THE

                      SPRING AND AUTUMN OF 1882.


                                  BY

             Mr. JOHN A. HARVIE BROWN, Mr. JOHN CORDEAUX,
               Mr. R. M. BARRINGTON and Mr. A. G. MORE.


"It is much to be wished that some of the light-keepers of our
lighthouses would make notes of their observations concerning seals,
whales, birds, fishes, and other animals. Such records would be
valuable; and might not some of them occupy their leisure hours
in the study of Natural History? ... Interesting observations
would then certainly be made, and new facts added to our stores of
knowledge."--'Chambers' Journal,' p. 831; Dec. 23, 1876.



LONDON:

PRINTED BY WEST, NEWMAN & CO., 54, HATTON GARDEN.

1883.


(_East Coast of Scotland_, p. 1.)

      "Whither, midst falling dew,
    While glow the heavens with the last steps of day,
    Far, through their rosy depths, dost thou pursue
      Thy solitary way?
           *       *       *       *       *
      Seek'st thou the plashy brink
    Of weedy lake, or marge of river wide,
    Or where the rocking billows rise and sink
      On the chafed ocean's side?
           *       *       *       *       *
      All day thy wings have fanned
    At that far height, the cold, thin, atmosphere.
    Yet stoop not, weary, to the welcome land,
      Though the dark night is near."

Cullen Bryant.


(_East Coast of England_, p. 27.)

.... "Wild birds that change Their season in the night, and wail their
way From cloud to cloud," ....


(_West Coast of Scotland_, p. 55.)

"Where the Northern Ocean in vast whirls Boils round the naked,
melancholy Isles Of further Thule, .... * * * * * Who can recount what
transmigrations there Are annually made? What nations come and go? And
how the living clouds arise. Infinite wings! till all the plume-dark
air And rude resounding shore are one wild cry?"


(_Irish Coast_, p. 73.)

    "Islets, so freshly fair.
      That never hath bird come nigh them,
    But from his course thro' air
      He has been won down by them."




PREFACE.


The following Report contains a summary of investigations of a
Committee, appointed by the British Association for the Advancement
of Science, at Southampton, in 1882, to consist of Professor Newton,
Mr. J. A. Harvie Brown, Mr. John Cordeaux, Mr. Philip M. C. Kermode,
Mr. K. M. Barrington, and Mr. A. G. More, for the purpose of obtaining
(with the consent of the Master and Elder Brethren of the Trinity
House, the Commissioners of Northern Lights, and the Commissioners of
Irish Lights) observations on the Migration of Birds at Lighthouses and
Lightships, and of reporting upon the same at Southport in 1883. Mr.
Cordeaux to be the Secretary.

An abstract of the Report was read by Mr. John Cordeaux at the Meeting
of the Association, held at Southport, in September, 1883.

The returns relating to Scotland have been arranged by Mr. J. A. Harvie
Brown; for the East Coast of England, by Mr. Cordeaux; and those for
the Coasts of Ireland, by Mr. R. M. Barrington and Mr. A. G. More.


CONTENTS.


                                           PAGE

  East Coast of Scotland                      1

  East Coast of England                      27

  West Coast of Scotland                     55

  Irish Coast                                73




FOURTH REPORT:

ON THE MIGRATION OF BIRDS IN THE SPRING AND AUTUMN OF 1882.


EAST COAST OF SCOTLAND, &c.

Faroe.--From Faroe, thanks to Herr Müller, we have the following
Report:--In spring one _Recurvirostra avocetta_ was seen on May 30th,
and two Arctic Terns on same day; wind W., and sunshine. Of _Anatidæ_,
_Œdemia nigra_ occurred on May 15th at Strómó, and two, male and
female, on 27th at same place. Two also, male and female, seen at same
place in the plumage of the second year at Kalbat, Strómó, on June
2nd. In autumn,--_i.e._, taking certain occurrences after the middle
of June as "autumn manœuvres,"--of _Turdidæ_, six or more Fieldfares
were killed or seen at Thorshavn on Dec. 7th, easterly breezes having
prevailed. Of _Phylloscopinæ_, a rush of _Regulus cristatus_ appears
to have taken place on Oct. 21st, as many were seen at Thorshavn and
elsewhere, and dead ones brought to Herr Müller. One dead Robin was
brought from Kollefjord, and several more had been seen on the same
date. One _Caprimulgus europæus_ was sent from Gauredal on June 16th.
_Loxia curvirostra_ appeared round Thorshavn for several days, and are
recorded on June 29th, and again on July 9th, on which latter date
those killed with stones at Tofle were in good condition. One Common
Swift was caught on board a fishing-smack midway between Iceland and
Faroe, also on June 29th. One White Wagtail, _Motacilla alba_, appeared
with N. wind on July 30th. One female Roller, _Coracias garrula_, was
shot at Thorshavn on July 22nd, wind E., and one Pomatorhine Skua was
seen on July 25th. One Woodcock was shot in Vaagó, Suderó, during a
S.E. storm, in clear weather; and of _Cygnidæ_, in all eleven--4 and
7--Wild Swans flew past high in air from N.W. to S.E. on Nov. 5th.
On Nov. 4th was N.E. wind, but on 5th N.W. and W. and showery. The
prevailing winds at the Faroe Isles were easterly; in October, from the
7th to the end of the month, steady easterly and S.E.

The ordinary papers, &c., were sent to thirty stations on the East
Coast of Scotland, Faroe, and Iceland, as was done in 1881.

Twelve stations on this coast have returned filled-in schedules,--the
same number as in 1881,--out of the twenty-six East Scotch stations. As
formerly, many returns are light, but those from Isle of May, Pentland
Skerries, and Sumburgh Head are fuller than before, again indicating
favourite highway's of migration. Bell Rock returns are also very full,
but not so full as Isle of May nor Pentland Skerries. From Isle of May
alone I have no less than nineteen schedules, and I have also to thank
Mr. Agnew for a jar of forty-three specimens of birds, besides others
sent me in the flesh or carbolised. At another time I intend to write
more fully concerning the birds of the Isle of May, which is a locality
of special interest to the student of migration.[1] From the Pentland
Skerries I have nine filled-in schedules, and from Sumburgh Head four;
from the Bell Rock three closely-filled schedules.

[Footnote 1: I intend to present the collection of birds formed on
the Isle of May to that station, to lie there in the skin, and serve
both to identify birds in future and to be of interest to visitors who
annually visit the Isle of May.]

Here follows the usual list of stations issued with each Report on the
same plan as before, the dates of years upon which the various stations
have sent in Reports being shown by asterisks.

Our thanks are especially due to those observers who have noted, as far
as possible, the _directions of flight_ of the birds noticed. If this
were done at all the stations returning schedules it would in a marked
degree assist our generalisations.


  East Coast of Scotland.

  1879, '80, '81, '82.
    *     *             4. North Uist, Shetland        230 ft.
          *    *    *   5. Whalsey Skerries, Shetland  145  "  Nevin Kerr.
                    *   6. Bressay, Shetland           105  "
    *     *    *    *   7. Sumburgh Head, Shetland     300  "  J. Wilson.
                        7B. Fair Isle                    ?  "

  Orkney.

    *     *    *    *   8. North Ronaldshay            140  " John Tulloch.
                        9. Start Point                  80  "
    *     *    *    *  10. Auskerry                    110  " J. Macdonald.
                       11. Hoy Sound (Low)              55  "
                       12. Hoy Sound (High)            115  "
                       13. Cantick Head                115  "
    *     *    *    *  14. Pentland Skerries           170  " D. MacDonald.

  Mainland.

          *    *    *  15. Dunnet Head, Caithness      346  " D. Laidlaw.
                       16. Holborn Head, Caithness      75  "
                       17. Noss Head, Caithness        175  "
                       18. Tarbat Ness, East Ross      175  "
               *    *  19. Cromarty, East Cromarty      60  " R. S. Ritson.
                    *  20. Chanonry Point, Elgin        40  " John McGill.
                       21. Covesea Skerries, Elgin     160  "
                 (_a_) 22. Kinnaird Head, Aberdeen     120  " D. M Scott.
                       23. Buchan Ness, Aberdeen       130  "
                       24. Girdleness, Aberdeen        185  "
                       25. Montroseness, Aberdeen      124  " "No birds."
    *     *    *    *  26. Bell Rock, Fife Coast        93  " James Jack.
    *     *    *    *  27. Isle of May, Firth of Forth 240  " J. Agnew.
          *    *    *  28. Inch Keith, Firth of Forth  220  " R. Grierson.
                       29. St. Abb's Head, Berwick     224  "

(_a_) Describes a bird but no schedule.


It will be seen from the above that there is a long extent of
coast-line whence I have scarcely received any returns since the
beginning of the scheme, _viz._, in Aberdeenshire. Is this always
due to actual scarcity of birds there, or to want of observing and
recording? I cannot tell, as I never receive any communications
positive or negative from these stations, except from Girdleness,
whence last year I had a brief return. At Montroseness scarcity of
birds, indeed almost utter absence, is the reason of no returns in
most years, and we can hardly ever expect much from it owing to its
position--"So near the town and all the paraphernalia of commerce," as
Mr. P. E. Reid, the lighthouse-keeper, informs me. He says, "I have
never been at a station where fewer birds come near the light; not over
half a dozen for the past year, and these were, we suspect. Gulls." At
Noss Head, Mr. Alex. Greig, not knowing the names of some of the birds,
thought it "better not to send in a report that would be incorrect";
but if he sends me in a report on those he does know the name of; or
some dates, and the winds prevailing at the time of great rushes of
birds, without the names of the birds, such would be very useful.
"Small birds" or "large birds" have a value to me in recording, though
the names are not given. That a migration was observable in 1882 at
Noss Head is a _fact_, obtained from Mr. Greig's reply to my post-card,
and may prove a useful fact in arriving some day at conclusions.

I fear it is not to be expected that we get any returns from the
Whaling Captains, the arduous duties they are engaged in making them
always too glad of complete rest when obtainable. Our thanks are due
to Mr. T. Southwell, however, for speaking to some of them on the
subject; our own application, by distributing circulars at Dundee with
the assistance of Mr. P. Henderson, naturalist of that town, not having
produced any results.

I have received occasional notes from Mr. Anderson's log, through Mr.
R. Gray (see Gannet, &c.). Mr. Anderson has again taken duty on an
Atlantic Liner, after a temporary engagement in the Mediterranean, so
we may hope to hear further of him and his observations.

As before, notes I have received from other sources besides the
lighthouses I will enter after the paragraphs on each species or group.
These are to be taken simply as corroborative evidence, or otherwise,
of the lighthouse reports, or as supplementary to them.

Notes have been kept upon about twenty-two species of Waterfowl
fifty-three species of land birds, and about eight or ten species of
littoral birds or waders, by our reporters on the East Coast.

Spring Migration I have kept distinct in this Report.

I have not given compiled notes on weather in this place this year, as
all that requires to be said will be found under the treatment of the
species, and a short paragraph under General Remarks.

The whole space of time included by our 1882 returns runs from February
in spring onwards, and in autumn from July to January 27th, 1883, the
date of the last returned schedules. In the General Remarks I notice
briefly the spring migration of 1883--at Isle of May, &c.

I visited this year Buchan Ness Lighthouse, on the Aberdeenshire coast,
and Mr. Andrew Gallie showed me a Manx Shearwater which he had found
dead on the balcony in the winter of 1879--80. Mr. Geo. Sim, who was
with me at the time, told me it was the first he had ever had record of
on the N.E. coast of Aberdeenshire.

I visited also Cape Wrath Lighthouse. There, I was told, very few birds
are ever seen at the lights, owing to its great height above the sea.

Turdidæ.--In spring, at Isle of May, March 2nd, after E. to S.E. gale
for twenty-four hours, a few Redwings (accompanied by Lapwings, Reed
Buntings, Rooks, and Hooded Crows among land birds, and Eider Duck,
Teal, and Black Guillemots amongst water-birds). At same station, on
April 8th and 19th, with E. winds. Redwings appeared; and on April
15th and 28th, single specimens of Ring Ouzels, again with strong E.
or N.E. winds (see Land Notes _infra_). In autumn, no records till
September; then at Whalsey, N. Ronaldshay, Auskerry, Pentland Skerries,
Dunnet Head, Bell Rock, Isle of May (max.), from Sept. 20th, records
on to Jan. 25th, 1883--the last record at N. Ronaldshay. The earliest,
Sept. 20th, was at Isle of May. All the species recorded occurred all
throughout the season, _viz._, Fieldfares, Redwings, Missel Thrushes
(min.). Common Thrushes (max.). Blackbirds; but Fieldfares and Redwings
also very abundant. Rushes, first at Auskerry and at N. Ronaldshay on
Sept. 27th, and indications of the same also at Pentland Skerries and
Isle of May. Numbers of Blackbirds, Thrushes, and Missel Thrushes
frequented N. Ronaldshay for three days after this date. At the
northern stations, wind strong S.E.; at Isle of May, N.E. gale. A vast
rush of many species took place, commencing on Oct. 8th, and continued
till about the 18th in force at all the stations sending in returns,
except Auskerry. We will speak fully of this movement in this place,
and afterwards will refer back to it under other species. Migration
general over whole coast-line. Wind during that time was N.E. to S.E.
to E., with fog and rain; on the 16th S. at southern stations, and
generally S.E. over all the coast. But at Pentland Skerries, mod. S.
and S.W. on 10th, 11th, and 13th. The rush here on 12th was, however,
with S.S.E. fresh, and fog. At N. Ronaldshay, on 7th--8th, numbers of
Thrushes were seen coming from the S.E., and more continued coming
till the 16th, all the time with strong S.E. wind. On 16th wind
changed to S., and all left. All stations send in heavy returns; but
the heaviest is from Isle of May, and hundreds were seen at Bell Rock
on the 12th-14th. A desultory migration, with frequent rushes, was
kept up all October; also all November, the following dates bulking
largest, _viz._, Nov. 5th, 9th, 12th, 18th, and 27th, the northerly
stations of Sumburgh Head and Pentland Skerries having during this
month heavier returns on the whole than the more southerly ones.
Wind during this time at Sumburgh Head fresh W., when fifty Redwings
appeared on 5th. But at same place, light N.N.E. on 9th, when thirty
Redwings were seen. On 27th, at same place, twenty-five Redwings were
seen flying S.W., with wind fresh W.; and at Isle of May, on 18th,
several flocks of Fieldfares and Ring Ouzels--which usually appear here
together--appeared with fresh S. breeze. All during the intermediate
time between the above dates migration was carried on. In December the
same continued, but in diminishing numbers; and an indication of a
small rush occurred between the 6th and 12th, but this appeared to be
greatly due to N.E. gales accompanied by snow-storms and severe frost
on the mainland, causing local migration, as is partly evident from
the species accompanying them, such as Larks, &c., and the exhausted
and emaciated appearance, especially of the Redwings, even on the
Isle of May. Between the 15th and 31st, at Auskerry, a great flock of
Buntings was seen daily. In January large flocks were seen from 4th
on to date of last entries in the schedules, and as late as 25th.
Fieldfares at Pentland Skerries, where the most were seen on the 13th.
At N. Ronaldshay, also, many Blackbirds, Common Thrushes, and Missel
Thrushes up to 24th, as already stated. Having detailed the movements,
and given dates and circumstances of these rushes, I will now name the
species which, along with Thrushes of various kinds, participated in
the movement, and this may serve as indicating the general lines of
1882. During the September rush we shall have occasion to refer amongst
others to the following species or groups of species:--_Saxicolinæ_
(which began to move, however, as early as August), some _Silviinæ_
(as Robin, Whitethroat, &c.). Golden-crested Wrens and _Phylloscopinæ_
(end of August), _Paridæ_, _Motacillidæ_, Pied Flycatchers, Swallows,
_Fringillidæ_, _Emberizidæ_, _Alaudidæ_, as also references throughout
to Hawks, Owls, Herons, and sea-birds. During the great October rush,
between 8th and 18th or 23rd, at the Isle of May, during thick fog and
S.E. to E. winds, Mr. Agnew describes the movement as beyond comparison
with any former experience of his. A vast rush of Bramblings,
Chaffinches, Golden-crested Wrens without number, _Silviinæ_, Robins,
Hedge Accentors, Siskins, Larks, Redwings, Ring Ouzels, Woodcocks,
Blackcaps (a few). Sedge Warblers, Jack Snipes; and this movement
continued in pulsing throbs and also continuously, covering all
October, November, and December, and far into 1883. For night after
night hundreds of thousands of small birds circled round the lanterns,
flying "against the sun" at Isle of May. From the Isle of May alone,
as already stated, I have nineteen schedules filled to overflowing
with Mr. Agnew's careful records. A separate paper on the Isle of May,
which I hope to prepare when I have leisure, is the only way to do
justice to the locality and its recorder. Curious that, although such
vast numbers were seen at Isle of May, the numbers at the more inland
station, or rather more landlocked station, of Inch Keith show quite a
small numerical return; but of these matters I shall have more to say
in my General Remarks. Six species of _Turdidæ_ occur recorded in the
East Coast returns. Land _Notes._--Mr. J. T. Garrioch, writing to me
under date March 13th, 1883, and remarking upon the vast nature of the
general migration between Oct. 8th and 25th, during an E. to S.E. gale,
mentions a few Fieldfares and one Thrush on the 9th which seemed much
exhausted. In spring of 1882, Fieldfares remained late into April in
Stirlingshire. A flock was seen among the foothills of the Denny range
by myself on April 16th.

Saxicolinæ.--In spring, Wheatears ("Stonechats" must be included
here.[2] Another season Mr. Agnew will be able to distinguish between
true Stonechats and Wheatears, and I hope other reporters also).
Whinchats, Redstarts: First record (Wheatear) at Isle of May, March
29th, strong W. wind, clear; latest (Redstart) June 29th, light E.,
fog. But this may belong to autumn; next latest (Redstart) May 24th,
at Isle of May. Earliest Wheatear March 29th; latest, and a rush, on
May 2nd (along with other birds unknown), N.E., rain and fog, at Bell
Rock. A large bird struck heavily, and fell into the sea. Rush of
Wheatears, April 5th. Earliest Whinchat, March 29th; latest and rush,
on April 15th, at Isle of May. Earliest Redstart, April 2nd, at Isle
of May; latest June 29th, and next May 24th. No great rush apparent.
Of the above, Whinchats are also named "Blue Janets," a name usually
applied, however, to the Hedgesparrow or Hedge Accentor. The record of
June 29th, of a Redstart in light E. wind, seems more of an accidental
nature, as it is separated from the one before by a month, and from
the true autumn migration by six weeks. Three species of _Saxicolinæ_
on East Coast in spring. In autumn, the same species. Records from
Whalsey, Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock, Isle of May, and
Inch Keith. (Note.--These are the same stations that reported last
season.) Earliest Stonechat, and earliest record, at Bell Rock on Aug.
9th, light S. breeze and fog; latest Stonechat Sept. 22nd, also at
Bell Rock. Indications of a rush at Pentland Skerries on Sept. 3rd.
"Blue Janets" participated in the October rush already spoken of (see
under Turdidæ). Earliest Wheatear, Aug. 17th, at Pentland Skerries;
latest Sept. 17th. Earliest Redstart Sept. 15th; latest Oct. 22nd. No
additional species of _Saxicolinæ_ appeared in autumn.

[Footnote 2: In so far as the records apply at Isle of May.]

Silviinæ.--In spring, Robins at Bell Rock only; one seen on April
10th, struck lantern, but not killed. But "unusual numbers" were seen
at Isle of May in April, and in spring generally. In autumn, Robins
at Sumburgh Head (where they are very rarely seen), N. Ronaldshay,
Pentland Skerries, Dunnet Head, Chanonry, Bell Rock, Isle of May, and
Inch Keith. Earliest at Isle of May, Aug. 18th; latest at Chanonry,
Dec. 20th, where one rested two days. No quantity till vast rush of
October, when Mr. Agnew says he never saw so many Robins before.
Greatest numbers seen on 12th. Enormous and uncommon numbers also on
18th at Isle of May, and all gone on 23rd. Large rush on 12th also at
Pentland Skerries, when numbers seen all day flying S.W. Indications
of the same movement also at N. Ronaldshay, and to a less extent at
Sumburgh Head (see under Turdidæ). Of other _Silviinæ_, in spring, a
few Whitethroats (identified from a specimen in spirits) showed at Isle
of May on May 6th, and in autumn a rush took place at same place on
Aug. 16th (specimen No. 33 in spirits); but I have no other records. A
single Blackcap on Oct. 14th participated in the rush at Isle of May.
Three species of _Silviinæ_ occurred.

Phylloscopinæ.--A marvellous migration of Golden-crested Regulus both
in spring and autumn. In spring, the only station giving returns is
Isle of May, where Mr. Agnew says they are very unusual at this season.
Earliest on March 9th, when one was seen at lights. Large numbers; a
rush on 19th and one bird on 20th. All March records accompanied by
N.W. through W. to S.W. winds. The rush took place with light S.W.,
and rain. Three other records are on April 1st, 4th, and 10th; a
rush on the 10th of females; the males preceded the females by some
weeks. Migration in spring thus lasted from March 9th to April 10th.
In autumn, at Sumburgh Head, Auskerry, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock,
and Isle of May. Earliest on Aug. 27th, at Isle of May; latest at same
station on Nov. 12th. Rushes: steady influx all September after the
13th; a solitary bird on Oct. 4th; a rush on 8th, indicated at Sumburgh
Head and Pentland Skerries. (_Note._--This is their first appearance
here for five years; it is marked "very rare" at Sumburgh Head, and
indeed natives had not seen them before). More decided at Bell Rock,
where they accompanied Bullfinches and Pipits on the 12th, and at Isle
of May. The body of the rush occupied three days, from the 8th to the
12th; during that time, at Isle of May, Mr. Agnew describes their
numbers as "enormous." Of other _Phylloscopinæ_, Leaf-warblers--the
species, however, not always recognisable from descriptions--were
fairly abundant. In spring, one record of either a Wood or Willow
Warbler (probably the latter) on May 24th at Isle of May. In autumn,
the Isle of May again produces all the records I have, the earliest
being considerable numbers of Chiffchaffs (identified) on Aug. 9th, a
few on Sept. 13th, 17th, and 27th, at Isle of May; a rush on Oct. 7th,
8th, and 9th, and all gone on 10th; a few on 14th, and all finally
gone on 15th. Three (or four?) species of _Phylloscopinæ_ recorded
on East Coast. Land _Notes._--On April 24th one Willow Warbler seen
at Shirgarton, ten miles W. of Stirling. Mr. Garrioch, writing from
Lerwick, says:--"In the evening of Oct. 9th my attention was called to
a large flock of birds crossing the harbour from the Island of Bressay,
and on coming to a spot on the shore where a large number had taken
refuge from the storm I found the flock to consist of Goldcrests, and a
few Firecrests amongst them. They continued to increase in numbers for
a few days, and several specimens were sent to me for preservation from
distant parts of the islands." These were preceded on the 8th by flocks
of Willow Wrens, one flock numbering about twenty. "The Goldcrests
spread over the entire islands, and were observed in considerable
numbers till the middle of November, when they all disappeared."
Subsequently, Mr. Garrioch, writing to me in reply to certain queries
as to the authenticity of the "Fire-crested Wrens," says:--"Of one
flock of Goldcrests, I observed five birds which I thought to be the
Firecrest. I obtained one specimen very distinctly marked. It seemed
to me that the Firecrests were very much more exhausted by the storm
than the Goldcrests." _Note._--I had in my letter shown the distinction
between the male Goldcrest and the true Firecrest, the male Goldcrest
having a mark above and below the eye, without the black line _through_
the eye, the Firecrest showing three bars.

Acrocephalinæ.--In Spring, at Isle of May, Mr. Agnew believes he
identifies "Reed Warblers" on April 4th; his description, however,
would equally apply perhaps to Whitethroats or to Sedge Warblers. In
autumn, a rush of similar birds took place there on Oct. 9th. Perhaps
two species recorded.

Accentorinæ.--In March, "Blue Janets," of Mr. Agnew, which are
represented by a Whinchat in spirits, but which name in Scotland is
correctly applied only to the Hedgesparrow or Hedge Accentor. In
autumn, one "Blue Janet" on Dec. 3rd. Whilst it is the most abundant
of migratory species in autumn on the E. English Coast, next to the
Goldcrest, it is curious to find scarcely any records on our E. Scotch
Coast.

Paridæ.--Titmice: In spring, one record ("the first seen on the lantern
for many years ") at Cromarty, on March 11th, fresh W. and clear. In
autumn, considerable numbers of Titmice at Isle of May on Aug. 9th;
occurred at Whalsey, N. Ronaldshay (in Oct., Nov., and Dec.), Pentland
Skerries, Isle of May, and Inch Keith. Earliest as above, Aug. 9th, at
Isle of May; latest at N. Ronaldshay, between Dec. 6th and 12th, when
a few came with Robins in a snow-storm (probably local movement only);
they accompanied Robins and Thrushes also at N. Ronaldshay on Nov.
12th; on Oct. 12th about sixteen stayed four days, and left on 16th;
this is the only indication of a rush. Number of species of _Paridæ_
unknown. _Land Notes._--On Sept. 6th I heard Marsh Tit in our woods at
Dunipace; this is the earliest autumn record I have, but spring records
I have at other localities in the county.

Troglodytinæ.--Common Wren: One species. A few records in autumn from
Sumburgh Head, Bressay, Pentland Skerries, N. Ronaldshay, and Isle of
May; earliest one seen for a moment on island. At Sumburgh Head on Aug.
11th, and three on 12th; latest at Pentland Skerries on Dec. 7th, wind
N.E., clear. Rush quite marked on Oct. 10th at Isle of May, still not
numerous; also at N. Ronaldshay, on Nov. 12th, a few came with Robins
and Thrushes, and a few on same day came also with Robins and Thrushes
to Isle of May, wind easterly. _Land Notes._--Mr. Garrioch obtained
one male Creeper on Oct. 12th, caught on Bressay with Great Spotted
Woodpeckers, "all seeming much the worse of the storm."

Motacillidæ.--In spring, at Whalsey, Bell Rock, and Isle of May; in all
five records. Earliest Feb. 24th, at Isle of May, light W. wind; latest
at Whalsey, May 24th ("Grey Wagtail," marked "very rare here"). At
Bell Rock all birds leave at high tide, being drowned off. In autumn,
records from Whalsey, Sumburgh Head, and Isle of May. Earliest from
23rd to 26th, a flock of "Grey Wagtails" flying about island, and on
27th seven seen all day on Pentland Skerries; latest on Isle of May,
one Pied Wagtail on Nov. 7th. No rush very apparent. On Sept. 20th, Mr.
J. Agnew has the record, "at Isle of May, three, N.E. gale, one very
white in colour and one very black "; and on Oct. 31st the further
record, "two, one very white, the other dark." We would like specimens
of these "very white Wagtails." Possibly records relate to three
species, but it will be safer only to include one at present. Titlarks
(Rock Pipits?) arrived in large numbers on Isle of May on March 9th,
and "supplemented some half dozen that remained all winter." N.B. The
ones that remained are probably "Rock Pipits" (_Anthus obscurus_),
and the additions are probably "Meadow Pip its" (_A. pratensis_). In
autumn, at Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock, and Isle of
May; earliest, one at Isle of May ("Mosscheeper," J. Agnew; or Meadow
Pipit, J. A. H. B.); latest, Bell Rock, Oct. 9th, "Mosscheeper," Mr.
Jack; on this occasion mixed with Bullfinches. Rush on Sept. 4th, at
Sumburgh Head, large flocks of "Rock Larks," _auct._ John Wilson; and
a constant stream of the same on 15th, along with Larks. Desultory
migration during September; only one record, curiously enough, in
October. Two species of _Anthinæ_ (_Motacillidæ_) noticed. _Note._--See
remarks on land migration of the Pied Wagtail at end of the General
Remarks.

Laniidæ.--One record, on Oct. 16th, at Isle of May; one bird
accompanied rush of Oct. 8th and 18th, strong S. after S.E. One species
recorded--the Great Grey Shrike. _Notes._--A male Great Grey Shrike
killed at Helensburgh, Dumbartonshire (illustrates line across central
districts of Scotland), Feb. 3rd, 1883; about 1st Nov., 1882, three
Great Grey Shrikes (two male and one female), and one same date at
Redcastle. Rosshire ('Scotsman,' Feb. 17th, 1883); the last great
appearance of this species was in 1873--74. A golden Oriole (_Oriolus
galbula_) occurred during the October migration at Lerwick, along with
two Spotted Woodpeckers, a Tree Creeper, and the Golden-crested Wrens.

Muscicapidæ.--Pied Flycatcher: three records at Isle of May on Aug.
15th, one female, light S., rain and fog; on Sept. 15th one female
struck and killed; on Nov. 7th one male flying S., but obtained,
fresh S.W. breeze. One species. _Notes._--Two Waxwings, a very fine
male and a female, killed at Kinneil by Mr. D. Nichol, gamekeeper to
Mr. Russell, Dundee Castle, on Jan. 18th, 1883. Kinneil is close to
Bo'ness, at the head of the Firth of Forth. This female is one of the
very finest birds I ever saw. Out of the hundreds examined in the
frozen marts of St. Petersburg and Moscow I only saw one to equal it,
the development of the wax-like appendages being very great on both
wings and tail.

Hirundinidæ.--In spring Swallows appeared at Whalsey, Sumburgh Head,
Auskerry, Pentland Skerries, Cromarty, Isle of May, and Inch Keith.
Earliest at Isle of May, April 22nd, and more on 23rd. Latest at same
place, on June 26th. Rush perceptible at Isle of May, May 11th to
17th, when a steady migration in small numbers were observed flying
N., wind W. to S.E. All Swallows seen have been during the forenoon.
Sand Martin on May 9th, at Whalsey Skerries. In autumn, at same
stations, continuous records from June, many no doubt relating to local
movements, therefore perhaps somewhat difficult to separate spring and
autumn records. On July 3rd and 4th, however, at Auskerry, flocks were
seen at noon; wind light S. to S.E. Martins are noted from Whalsey,
and Auskerry and Pentland Skerries; and Sand Martin from Isle of May
on Aug. 24th. All other records apply to Common Swallows. Swallows
resident at Cromarty disappeared on Sept. 1st. No great rushes very
apparent. Latest on Oct. 6th, at Sumburgh Head; next, on Oct. 2nd, at
Isle of May; strong S.W. wind. Three species noticed. _Land Notes._--In
spring, first Swallow seen by M. P. Kermode and myself at Dunipace, on
April 23rd; and same day, at Shirgarton, by another party. None seen on
16th, when Bidwell and I were out, and when we took a Dipper's nest and
four eggs. On 26th, Mr. K. Gray saw two Martins in Edinburgh. Swallows
and Sand Martins were first seen at Kelso, on the Tweed, on April 16th
(_auct._ J. J. Armistead, Esq.). See also General Remarks.

Fringillidæ.--In spring, great movements of many species of Finches,
both in spring and autumn, comprising the following species:--Green
and Grey Linnets, Chaffinches, Bramblings, Siskins, Redpolls, House
Sparrows, Tree Sparrows, Bullfinches, the Green and Grey Linnets
predominating, and occurring at the following stations:--Spring,
almost entirely monopolised at Isle of May; Siskins also appearing at
Inch Keith. From March 3rd on to May 22nd. Only indication of unusual
rush perhaps on March 17th and 18th (Green Linnets and Chaffinches).
Prevailing wind at Isle of May all April, many birds appearing, S.E.,
except on April 25th, when there were no birds, the wind shifting
round to N.E. suddenly. In autumn, at Isle of May, a solitary Green
Linnet appeared on July 14th. The above species showed at Sumburgh
Head, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock, Isle of May, and Inch Keith.
Earliest, Grey Linnets, Aug. 23rd, at Isle of May. Latest, at same
spot, on Dec. 8th. Vast rush in October (9th to 23). Green Linnets,
earliest somewhat later than the last, but the rush about same time.
Chaffinches, no records till Oct. 10th, at Sumburgh Head, where it is
only seen on migration. The great rush of Chaffinches, as compared with
other species, apparent, but movement distinct in October. Brambling,
no records till Oct. 10th, when a rush past was made, and no more seen
again till Dec. 3rd, when one was seen. Nine Siskins, a considerable
movement; earliest, Aug. 7th, at Isle of May; latest, Oct. 16th. The
rush of this species took place on Sept. 27th and 28th, when scores,
mostly females, were on Isle of May; and they also showed at Inch
Keith. A rush, however, also took place about Oct. 16th. Redpolls
appear not quite so abundantly in the records as other species. The
records are in September and December. A rush of Tree Sparrows took
place at Isle of May, where Mr. Agnew says he does not remember seeing
this species before. One was captured on Oct. 15th. A very few House
Sparrows were noticed in October. A few Bullfinches showed at Bell
Rock, accompanied by Pipits and Golden-crested Wrens, &c., on Oct. 9th
to 12th. The records take me up to Dec. 12th for _Fringillidæ_. Nine
species of _Fringillidæ_ under notice. _Land Notes._--On Oct. 8th a
flock of about fifty Mealy Redpolls, all males, kept flying round about
Lerwick, at the same time with a few Willow Wrens, one flock numbering
twenty.--(J. T. G.)

Emberizidæ.--In spring, the February records may apply to last Report
as regards Snow Buntings. They were uncommonly numerous at Isle of May
in 1881-82. Large flocks seen flying S. there on Feb. 22nd, and also
on 13th and 24th. On March 1st large numbers, taking on the summer
plumage, or mostly adults, after a gale of twenty-four hours, from
E. to S.E. (_Vide_ under Turdidæ of this date; same remarks apply
here.) Same day, one Reed Bunting. Snow Buntings continued to show at
intervals all March; two showed on April 15th at Isle of May. None
were seen in May. In autumn, the records are numerous of Snow Buntings
from most of the stations sending returns; perhaps most so at Pentland
Skerries in November. Do not bulk so largely at Isle of May. Earliest
Sept. 19th, at Isle of May (the remark, "too early," appended by Mr.
Agnew). No great rush in October along with the other species, but
bulking largely in November at Sumburgh Head, where 250 showed in three
compact flocks on 6th; also at Pentland Skerries abundant all through
the month, but maximum about the 10th, when fully 1000 were all day
on the Island; winds N.E. to E. and S.E., with some calm days and
variable. About this time departing flocks seen to fly off S.W. and
flocks seen to arrive from the N.E. over the sea. Snow Buntings seem to
arrive at Dunnet Head more frequently with W. and S.W. winds, and also
to a considerable extent with similar wind at Pentland Skerries. This
has been remarked before. After sharp frosts and N.E. snow-storms they
soon appear. Common Bunting is reported from Isle of May for the first
time on Dec. 19th; Yellow Buntings appeared occasionally in reports at
Isle of May; and the first recorded occurrence at Pentland Skerries on
Dec. 17th and 19th. One remained a week singly--a female--on Isle of
May up to Nov. 4th. Four species of Buntings appear.

Alaudidæ.--In spring the Skylark is reported "very rare" at Whalsey;
one on March 14th. A few at Isle of May on March 15th; none there on
April 3rd: fair S.E. breeze. In autumn full records, but not before
Sept. 11th, at Sumburgh Head, accompanied by "Rock Larks." Occurred at
Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries and Isle of May. Earliest as above,
Sept. 11th; latest Dec. 31. Rush from about Sept. 11th to 18th at
Sumburgh Head, and also patent at Isle of May; vast rush most observed
at Bell Rock and Isle of May in October (see under Turdidæ). At Bell
Rock most on Oct. 12th, "Bullfinches, Blackbirds, Mavises, Larks,
Stonechats, Golden-crested Wrens, Titlarks and Starlings, dead on
balcony or fell into sea. Mr. Jack is sure hundreds must have been
killed that night." Again, on Dec. 20th, Mr. Jack remarks, "largest
numbers of Larks ever seen here; impossible to state numbers seen or
killed; striking hard for hours, like a shower of hail." On Oct. 12th
and Dec. 20th loss of life must have been very great; great flocks of
Larks alone at Bell Rock on 16th and again on 31st. Records do not take
me beyond this date. One species.

Sturnidæ.--Records of Common Starling comparatively scanty. Earliest
July 1st at Isle of May, a large flock of young birds and daily flocks
seen, mostly young, to July 29th. On Aug. 7th a large flock seen
coming from the N.; another on 14th. Numbers on Island fall off in
September; by the 23rd but few left. In October only one record at
Pentland Skerries, when two struck; none in November, and two records
in December, on 17th at Pentland Skerries, and on 25th at Isle of May,
when eight were seen. Scarcity of Starlings again (see Report 1881, p.
9) noticeable. One species. The only other British species is a very
rare British bird--the Rose-coloured Starling.

Corvidæ.--I have records from every month in the year but June. I take
them in order. In January one record, a large flock of Jackdaws seen
flying S.W. at Cromarty (probably a local migration). At Isle of May
one Rook on Feb. 12th, flying W., wind S.W. In March, at Sumburgh Head,
two Ravens ("the first seen since the autumn of 1881" here), flying N.
with light S. breeze, and another seen on the 16th in a W. gale. At
Isle of May two Rooks seen on 29th ("never many seen here together"),
light W. breeze. In April, at Bell Rock, four Rooks seen flying E.
over the sea, wind S.E., April 4th; at Isle of May, on May 14th, four
Carrion Crows and thirty-six Hooded Crows alighted and killed several
of Mr. Agnew's lambs; N.E. gale at the time. At Pentland Skerries two
Rooks on Island, wind fair, S.S.E. In autumn, records from most of the
stations sending returns, from July 26th, at Pentland Skerries, to Dec.
9th, at same place (Ravens). The only, appearance of a rush was when
fifteen Hooded Crows appeared at Pentland Skerries, but this may only
have been local. This was on Oct. 12th, however, the time of the vast
rush of other species. The Pentland Skerries are regularly visited by
Ravens and Hooded Crows, and occasionally by Rooks, which latter may
come across the North Sea at times, or may simply make local migrations
from Tongue in Sutherlandshire. A few appeared at the Isle of May also
at the time of the vast rush. Five species of _Corvidæ_ noted. _Land
Notes._--Mr. Garrioch writes:--"I obtained a male Jackdaw on Oct.
15th, shot on a peat dyke near Lerwick. Same evening a large flock of
Ravens assembled on the shore at Sound (?), attracted by a number of
Puffins' and Guillemots' bodies driven ashore by the force of the sea,
as also fish of different sorts which had shared the same fate. The
Ravens betook themselves to the high cliffs of Bressay. They continued
to pass the same spot during November, December and January, going
westward over the islands every morning at daybreak and returning at
dusk to roost in the same rocks." On Oct. 14th a Crow took refuge on a
vessel--the Danish ship 'Otto' (Capt. Mortensen)--about eleven miles
from St. Abb's Head, and flew off shoreward on approaching Granton
('Edinburgh Courant,' Oct. 14th).

Cypselidæ.--One record only at Sumburgh Head, on Aug. 23rd; light airs
N., clear.

Cuculidæ.--We had no entries under this head anywhere on east coast of
Scotland in 1881. At Cromarty, Cuckoo first heard, April 4th, light E.
breeze, clear; and on June 23rd two Cuckoos were all day on Isle of
May, both of which Mr. Agnew secured for the Isle of May collection,
and they were old and young. Stated by Mr. Agnew to be very rare on
Isle of May. One species. _Land Notes._--A Cuckoo was shot on Aug.
30th, at Glasslaw, Bruchlay, Aberdeenshire (_vide_ W. Horn).

Strigidæ.--Earliest July 4th, at Pentland Skerries, one "Horned Owl"
(rare). In Sept., at Auskerry, two Short-eared Owls seen at noon, light
variable wind; and in October a pair remained at same place three days
after 28th. One seen at Pentland Skerries on 12th. Fresh E.S.E. breeze.
On Nov. 18th, at Bell Rock, one Long-eared Owl rested on balcony, fresh
S. breeze; and on 9th one Short-eared Owl seen asleep in grass on Isle
of May, and afterwards shot for Isle of May collection. On Dec. 19th,
at Pentland Skerries, one Grey Owl. Probably only two species, but
possibly three.

Falconidæ occur in almost every month of the year, but fewer records
in spring than in autumn. Many visits are the result of only local
migration in search of food; indeed such are the great majority of
instances, although these must also come to be distinguished as far
as possible from the birds of actual passage. In spring, frequent in
February at several stations, always on predatory excursions, notably
at insular stations, as Whalsey and Isle of May. In March only two
records at some places, and in April two at the same places, both on
the same day--the 23rd. At Whalsey a game Hawk rested, apparently much
fatigued, wind E. and haze. In May one record on 25th, at Isle of May.
In autumn, at Whalsey, Sumburgh Head, Auskerry, Bressay, Pentland
Skerries, Bell Rock, Isle of May. Records numerous, though not so
great as in 1881. Greatest aggregate in any one month in October. Most
numerous at Pentland Skerries and Isle of May. Earliest July 29th, at
Isle of May, one small Hawk. Latest through December into Jan., 1883.
Rush, if any can be said to be appreciable, in October. Thus, such
species as game Hawks, large Hawks, large brown Hawks, dark grey Hawks,
&c., appear in the records more abundantly in October than at other
times, whilst Sparrowhawks, Merlin and Kestrel appear more frequently
at other times. The following species are included, but it would be
more satisfactory to obtain specimens:--Kestrel, Merlin, Sparrowhawk
(max.), and those mentioned above. On Oct. 12th two Hawks were hunting
small birds all night, in the zone of light. Buzzards and Harriers are
also probably included.[3]

[Footnote 3: Difficult to say how many species are intended, but
probably at least six.]


WATER-BIRDS.

Pelecanidæ.--In spring, in May, at Sumburgh Head, ten Gannets were
seen, flying S., at 9.30 a.m., with S.S.E. breeze, and on 4th
thirty-five, also flying S., with S.E. breeze. In autumn, at Sumburgh
Head, Pentland Skerries and Dunnet Head, observations taken; earliest
July 5th, three flying S.E., mod. N.W. at Sumburgh. On 17th, flying E.
all day, fresh S. showers. Pass and repass Dunnet Head every day till
Sept. 15th in threes and dozens. One species. _Other Notes._--From Mr.
T. Anderson, S.S. 'Marathon,' Dec. 27th, 1882.--"This has not been a
very good trip for observations oh birds, the southerly migration being
past; but when off the coast of Portugal, on our way home, I saw from
150 to 200 Solan Geese in company, and occasionally finding a shoal of
fish. All their movements were in a northerly direction; when they were
done with a shoal 01 fish, they never proceeded S., but always N."

Ardeidæ.--Common Herons: Stragglers at almost all times; most records
in autumn. That local migration is principally indicated is seen by
the very various directions of flight noted at some stations, often
coming from and returning to the same points of the compass. These are
given in detail in sixteen schedules and in the ledger from which this
report is written. In spring, April 11th, record at Isle of May, one at
Sumburgh Head, marked "rare," light S.E. airs; and Herons frequented
the shore off and on at Isle of May, from the date of May 1st to the
first week in September. On 24th three were seen; these flying N. On
June 19th one addition was seen there. In July two recorded, one flying
N. on 31st. In autumn, Aug. 16th, at Sumburgh Head, one flying W.,
light E. airs; on 17th three flying N., light S.E. airs; and on 19th
one flying W., light E. airs. In Sept., at Whalsey, on 14th, one flying
W., marked "very rare so early," wind N., fresh, and at Cromarty "seen
daily since first week in May." At Isle of May on 22nd, in calm and
haze, one "screaming as if lost." Then in October we find on different
dates Herons recorded as flying in all directions: 13th, "came from S.
and returned S.;" 23rd, flying W., wind S.W.; flying S.W., gale S.E.,
all night at Bressay, when many other species struck unseen; 24th, at
Isle of May, flying S., and similar records at various stations all
through November. N.B. These ledger entries may be useful later. One
species.

Anatidæ.--Wild Geese: In spring, on March 1st, two were seen, flying
very fast, 1000 feet in the air, crying loudly, before an E.S.E wind,
and settled on the land at Sumburgh Head to rest. A Brent Goose seen
at Isle of May on March 20th, and a large flock of Geese flying E.
accompanied by Curlews at Isle of May, on April 21st. One Brent ("Sly
Goose") at Pentland Skerries, in June (marked "rare"), flying E. In
autumn, at Chanonry, Sumburgh Head, North Ronaldshay and Isle of May.
Earliest noted, but probably local movement after the birds had taken
up their quarters on Aug. 26th, at Chanonry, when 100 Grey Geese were
seen, fair S.W., clear. Here the general flight is N. or S., being the
"lie" of the Firth; on 28th also 100 seen. Latest records into January,
1883. Bushes imperceptible, but very large flocks are mentioned at Isle
of May, on December 23rd and 24th, flying from S.W. to N.E. "Sly Geese"
(Brent) are noted on Oct. 14th, at Sumburgh Head; at Isle of May,
thirteen Wild Geese, flying W. in a single line, on Oct. 2nd, light S.
wind, clear. Two species of Wild Goose. Eider Duck arrived at breeding
haunts at Whalsey Head on March 29th; wind N. and haze. At Isle of May
twenty-three, about equal male and female, first seen on March 1st,
after a gale which had lasted for twenty-four hours from E. to S.E.,
and which brought over Redwings, Lapwings, Rooks, Hoodies, &c. (see
Turdidæ). First record at Sumburgh Head is not till April 17th; three
seen; fresh E.N.E. wind. In autumn, at Pentland Skerries, continuous
flocks flying S.E., mostly females, on Oct. 6th (compare with Report
1881, p. 12). Again, at Sumburgh Head, three (the first seen), on Nov.
5th, fresh W.; and at Pentland Skerries, on 22nd, a flock, mixed male
and female, flying S.; and on 28th a large flock, mostly males, about
the rocks all day. Of other Ducks scattered records only: a few Teal,
seen on March 1st, at Isle of May; at Pentland Skerries, Sept. 3rd;
and seven on pools on Island, on Dec. 6th. Grey Ducks (probably Scaup
or Pochard) at Chanonry, where some 400 flying W. were noted. The
records of Anatidæ not so voluminous this season as last; three or four
species. On March 23rd fifteen White Swans came from S., rested on the
sea at Sumburgh Head, and flew on N.; wind fresh, S.W. breeze. Again
at same place. Swans flying N. and crying loudly on April 10th. On May
9th one was shot at same place. It alighted in a vöe three miles from
station, and was no doubt a weakly bird so late in the spring; fresh
S.S.E. In autumn, records at Sumburgh Head, N. Ronaldshay, Chanonry,
and Isle of May. Earliest Sept. 18th, at Chanonry, when six were seen;
light S.W. and cloudy. At same place, two on 25th and ten on 26th;
haze and rain, variable and light N.E. In November, six flying W.
at N. Ronaldshay, strong N.E. and snow. In December four seen at N.
Ronaldshay, fresh E., and on 28th two seen at N. end of Isle of May.
_Note._--Look out always for two sizes of Wild Swan--the large Common
Wild Swan and the lesser Bewick's Swan. If together the two species are
easily distinguishable. _Land Notes._--Brent Geese unusually abundant
on the Tay this year, 1881-82 (P. D. Maloch).

Columbidæ.--_Note._--We had no records of Pigeons on E. coast last
season, 1881. This year we have them both in spring and autumn. We
would like to know if all records of "Wood Pigeon" are strictly
correct, and if no veritable Stock Doves passed on migration.[4] In
spring, at Bell Rock, on April 9th, one "Wood Pigeon" struck and was
killed at 10.30 p.m., light S.S.E.; and at Isle of May one struck and
was killed at 2 a.m., light S.E. Again, on May 22nd, one seen at Isle
of May, S.E. clear; and on 29th one, at 6 p.m., seen flying S., light
W., clear; and on June 28th one again, at Isle of May, at 3 p.m.,
light E., fog. In autumn, on Sept. 26th, at Isle of May, one, light
S.E., hail and rain; and Nov. 2nd, at Isle of May, one flew S., after
coming to the light; and on 26th another was seen. At Pentland Skerries
one rose off the island and flew W., gale from S.E. In December, Wood
Pigeons occurred at Isle of May under the following circumstances and
dates:--On 3rd, one; on 6th, thirteen flying S., severe snow-storm;
on 12th, thirty, light W. wind, thick fog; on 13th, fifty-one in
lighthouse garden, eating ravenously; severe snow-storm from the 6th
to 9th, and hard frost until 16th; on 14th-15th, hundreds seen. A rush
caused by local stress of weather, or they may have come directly
across seas. (_Note._--I have elsewhere noted the arrivals of Wood
Pigeons from Norway, as seen by me on the Fifeshire coast, and the
S. trend of their flight, as soon as they came over the land; and I
have given the above records in detail, as I think they will be useful
again.) Besides Wood Pigeons, I have two records of Rock Doves,--one
at Pentland Skerries, seen flying N., with light S. wind, at 3 p.m.,
on Nov. 8th; and one on Dec. 1st, at midnight, at Dunnet Head, fresh
S.S.E., thick haze and rain; probably only local movements. Two species
recorded. _Land Notes._--About a dozen "Small Pigeons," which "may,"
Mr. Garrioch thinks, "have been Wood Pigeons," were seen in the Island
of Yell at the end of October, and from other quarters. Mr. Garrioch
was informed of flights of "strange birds seen from the off-lying
islands flying off in a southerly direction."

[Footnote 4: See a paper by me on the "Increase and Extension of
Range of the Stock Dove," read before the Royal Physical Society of
Edinburgh, Feb., 1883. They are seen in large migratory flocks on the
mainland in May--as in the Carse of Gowrie--in some seasons, and I have
received specimens this spring and winter from two localities in this
county--Stirlingshire.]

Rallidæ.--Records of Corn Crake scarce. In May, first heard at Cromarty
on 14th. In September one killed at light at Pentland Skerries on 20th,
light N.E. and cloudy, indicating possibly date of departure from the
Orkneys. _Land Note._--I am credibly informed that the Corn Crake was
heard in two different localities in N. Uist about March 18th, 1882;
Mr. Alex. Carmichael, who is studying the Natural History of the Long
Island, himself heard one. Very late occurrences of this species are
also on record in previous years, such as at Tyree on Nov. 24th, 1880,
evidently wounded or disabled birds (W. Craibe Angus, who exhibited the
bird at a late meeting of the Glasg. Nat. Hist. Soc.); and another,
dating Dec. 17th, 1882, is recorded from Ireland in 'The Zoologist,'
April, 1883, p. 177. It seems quite probable that some birds detained
from migrating may remain all winter in the milder portions of Great
Britain, and that early spring records may thus, in many cases, be
accounted for.

Charadriadæ.--Golden Plover: in spring, one record at Sumburgh Head;
three seen, light S. breeze and cloudy, at 10.30 a.m. In autumn, at
Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries, Dunnet Head, Isle of May. Smaller
movement in 1882 than in 1881. Earliest recorded, Aug. 7th, at Pentland
Skerries; a flock. Latest, at same place, on Dec. 18th; a single
bird. Rushes scarcely appreciable, except 120 birds on Oct. 15th, at
Sumburgh Head; S.S.E. gale and rain; and a large flock (?) at Dunnet
Head on Oct. 2nd. At Sumburgh Head also about forty on Nov. 12th.
Oystercatcher: in spring "Sea-pyots" arrived here, Whalsey, on March
3rd at night, with strong E.S.E. breeze and clear. Two seen, first
time, at Isle of May on April 2nd. In autumn, after remaining on
Whalsey, left between Aug. 13th and 18th, during a fog and fresh S.E.
breeze; and on 13th, at Isle of May, one large flock of young were
seen, light S. and haze. On Sept. 14th a flock flew about Pentland
Skerries all day in light N. breeze. Beyond these I have no other
records. Of Lapwing, a record or two on Feb. 13th and 24th, after
S.W. gale on 13th; and 26th, stragglers? In spring, at Whalsey ("very
rare"), Sumburgh Head, Bell Rock, and Isle of May. Earliest in spring,
March 2nd, at Isle of May, after a gale from E. to S.E. for twenty-four
hours (see under Turdidæ of date); 3rd, eight seen; large numbers again
on 20th. Latest on June 19th, four, with light S.E. and haze. Two only
in May at Isle of May, and these appeared with light N.E. wind. In
April a few passed on 3rd, 9th, and 10th, in easterly winds, or rested.
In autumn, at Pentland Skerries, Chanonry, and Isle of May. Earliest,
Aug. 17th, one seen, light W. wind. Latest, a few in December, at
Pentland Skerries, flying W. Bushes inappreciable, unless Sept. 14th,
at Chanonry, forty seen; and on 28th, at Isle of May, twenty-seven
seen, in light S.S.E. wind. _Land Notes._--On April 16th Lapwings were
still going in flocks in the central counties of Scotland. At the River
Pattack, in S. Inverness-shire, I saw distinctly a Whimbrel (_Numenius
phæopus_) twice, on May 24th. (Possibly an addition to the birds of
Inverness shire.) See under W. coast also.

Scolopacidæ.--Curlew: in spring, a number of records at Sumburgh
Head, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock, Isle of May. Earliest, at Isle of
May ("unusual at this season"), one seen, light W. wind and clear.
Latest, at Isle of May, a number seen on June 28th, light E. fog. As
early as May 23rd one young one seen on rocks at Isle of May (this
properly belongs to autumn migration; result abnormal, perhaps owing
to unusually early season, after a mild winter). General movement
continuing all July, and difficult to separate spring and autumn
manœuvres. As will be seen others of the _Scolopacidæ_ make early
appearances also this season (Woodcock, Snipe, &c.). In autumn, a
large movement of Curlews between Pentland Skerries and Isle of May.
To the N. of Pentland Skerries very few observed. Earliest (if we take
July), July 10th, at Pentland Skerries, one heard. Latest, also at
Pentland Skerries, on Dec. 7th, a flock, strong E. Rushes spasmodical
and frequent in July and August. _Note._--Between Oct. 14th and 19th,
strong S. gale, moderate on 20th, at Pentland Skerries. Sept. 22nd,
October and December, but almost inappreciable in numbers. Woodcock,
a few in spring, but a steady record in autumn. In spring, one record
at Isle of May on April 9th; "not remembered to have been seen here
before at this season." In autumn, at Whalsey, Sumburgh Head, N.
Ronaldshay, Pentland Skerries, and Isle of May. Earliest, Oct. 8th
(N.B., commencement of vast migration before noted), two seen at N.
Ronaldshay, S.E. fresh; continued in small numbers through 12th, 13th,
14th, 15th, 19th, 25th (co-existent with rush of other species), at
most stations on E. coast sending returns. Latest, on Dec. 4th, at
Pentland Skerries. Evident rush on Oct. 13th at Isle of May, when no
less than twenty were shot there. On Isle of May a record in November
says, "very unusual so late," when three were seen. Of Snipe, only one
record at Isle of May in spring, on April 5th, with the remark, "very
unusual at this season." Autumn, at Sumburgh Head and Whalsey (only two
records), and at Pentland Skerries and Isle of May. Earliest, several
on Aug. 17th, at Pentland Skerries; and 6th, one at Isle of May, strong
W., clear (remark, "very early"). Latest, on Dec. 19th, at Pentland
Skerries, six seen, strong S.W. Scarcely a rush appreciable. Jack
Snipes are recorded on Sept. 25th and 27th, at Isle of May, with light
S. and S.E. breeze.

Scolopacidæ (Waders).--Earliest, "Plovers Pages" or "Plovers Leaders"
(Dunlin, J. A. H. B.), Aug. 10th, at Isle of May; latest, Redshanks,
Dec. 7th, at Isle of May. "Sandlarks" and "Pipers" appeared at
Chanonry, Aug. 30th, when one was seen, and disappeared on Oct. 13th.
(Probably the Common Sandpiper, but "Pipers" is a name used generically
for many species.) If any rush, apparent on Sept. 19th, 20th, and 26th,
at Chanonry. Numbers on these dates: 90, 90, and 290; but this is
deceptive, and not to be relied upon as a statistic, Waders movements
are so erratic. Returns of "Pipers," "Waders," "Redshanks," and
"Sandlarks," are given from several stations. Probably seven or eight
species of Waders. _Land Notes._--Rare occurrences. Pectoral Sandpiper
(_Tringa maculata_, Vieill.) shot at The Ross Priory, mouth of the
Endrick River, Loch Lomond, by Sir Geo. Leith Buchanan, Bart., on Nov.
24th, 1882. There seems to be a line of country across this part of
Scotland where rare things turn up, witness:--Desert Chat, at Alloa;
Blue-throated Warbler, Isle of May; Great Grey Shrikes, commonly; and
others. (See General Remarks, _infra_.)

Sterninæ.--In spring. Terns arrived at breeding haunts at Whalsey on
May 19th, on island, all day long; came from S.E., with S.E. wind and
clear; seen again on 28th (same date as 1881). At Sumburgh Head on June
2nd, and five on 6th. At Cromarty, Lesser Tern arrived at 2 p.m. on
June 11th, strong N. and clear; and more on 15th. In autumn, Whalsey,
Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries, Cromarty, Isle of May. Earliest, for
two minutes or so heard passing over the lights at 10.30, at Sumburgh
Head, light E. airs and thin haze. On Aug. 15th all left Whalsey, light
S. breeze, haze and fog. "Leave Pentland Skerries about Aug. 30th."
Lesser Tern left Cromarty on Aug. 29th; three seen flying south at
Sumburgh Head on Sept. 4th (the only record in that month this year).
One more record on Nov. 26th at Pentland Skerries, a flock on island
all day. Two species. _Note._--Look out for the Sandwich Tern,--a large
Tern, much larger than the Common Tern; goes up the Fife and Forfar
coasts in spring.--J. A. H. B.

Laridæ.--In spring, "Chasers" (Skuas), one on May 28th, at Portland
Skerries ("rare here"), E.S.E. breeze. ("Picked up limpets thrown at
it by the men.") He speaks of these as "Chasers," but in autumn of
"Skuas or Norwegian Gulls, very rare." Of Skuas there are four species
known in Scotland, _viz._, the Great Skua, or Bonxie of Shetland; the
Richardson's Skua, or commonest species; the Long-tailed, or Buffon's
Skua, with very long centre tail-feathers; and the Pomatorhine Skua,
with curious recurved tail-feathers. Perhaps this note may be of
service in future in separating them. The Bonxie and the Pomatorhine
are rare. In autumn, Skua, or "Dirty Allan," at Isle of May on Oct.
15th, one seen, and well described; and three seen of "Skua," or
"Norwegian Gull," at Pentland Skerries on 19th, and again on 29th.
Kittiwakes are recorded, Aug. 5th, at Isle of May; large numbers.
_Note._--Most of birds breeding on Isle of May had left by this time,
but a number of Kittiwakes remain still; all left by 25th, however.
Great Black-backed Gulls noted passing S. past Isle of May on Aug.
13th. "Large White Gulls" (glaucous?) often wheeling round, Aug. 25th,
for two or three days; and a large flight came from N., and flew S.
past Isle of May, on Oct. 24th. "Iceland Gulls" at Sumburgh Head, on
Dec. 1st and 8th, after gales and rain. Gulls, enormous numbers (and
Gannets) passed Isle of May, Sept. 30th. Herring Gulls, a movement S.
past Isle of May all day, on 10th. Lesser Black-backed Gulls (called
"Lady Ann Gulls ") flying S.E., and numbers on the 14th and 18th.
Iceland Gulls (with Swans), two seen at Sumburgh Head, Dec. 25th, and
one (last record) on Dec. 8th. The Larger Glaucous Gull is not always
easily distinguished from the Lesser Iceland Gull; both being very
white, however, and are in relationship to one another as the Great
Black-backed Gull is to the Lesser Black-backed Gull. Land Notes.--At
Lerwick a large flock of Common Gulls passed northward in the evening,
flying very low, on Oct. 13th.--(J. T. G.)

Procellariidæ.--One Stormy Petrel record; two seen at noon at Auskerry
on Sept. 29th; light variable breezes.

Alcidæ.--In spring, records from Whalsey, Sumburgh Head, and Isle of
May. On Feb. 1st, large numbers of Razorbills and Marrots appeared at
Isle of May, light S. breeze; and again on March 18th; and a great
increase on May 3rd; light S.E. Black Guillemots appeared at Whalsey
during the night of March 2nd, with light E.S.E. breeze, and clear
(called "Tysties"). At Sumburgh Head, Guillemots (or "Marrots") arrived
on March 18th, a fortnight later than in 1881. In autumn, a general
migration of Rock Birds, between Aug. 13th and 18th, during a fog (Why
do birds apparently often choose a fog to depart in?), light S.E. (or
is it always more to do with direction of the wind at the time?). See
back. At Pentland Skerries, continuous streams of Guillemots flying
E. through the N. Pentland Firth. Little Auks, one in E. gale on Nov.
16th, close to Isle of May, and more resting on 18th; and a few in a
severe snow-storm on Dec. 7th, at same place. Four species of _Alcidæ_.

Of unknown birds I have left out notices this year, though keeping note
of them for further use, as they may come to be identified later.




EAST COAST OF ENGLAND.


Printed forms of enquiry and letters of instruction were sent to
thirty-six lighthouses and light-vessels on the East Coast of England,
and two stations on the Channel Islands,--thirty-eight altogether,
against thirty-six in 1881,--and returns have been received from
thirty, a result which is very encouraging.

Independent reports have also been sent in from Heligoland,
Seaton-Carew, and Redcar, Flamborough, Spurn, North-East Lincolnshire,
and Northrepps, making a total of thirty-seven reporting stations,
against thirty-two in 1881.

I have again to thank H. Gätke, T. H. Nelson, C. Donald Thompson,
Matthew Bailey, William Eagle Clarke, H. Bendelack Hewetson, M.D., and
J. H. Gurney, jun., for their general kind co-operation and assistance
in the enquiry.

Special thanks are also given to all my kind and painstaking observers
on the lighthouses and light-vessels whose names are given in the
report. While thanks are due to all, it may perhaps be not invidious
to mention the very excellent returns received from the Farne Island
stations, the Longstone and Inner Farne lighthouses, no less than
eleven well-filled schedules having been sent in.

The east coast stations are as follows, those making returns being
marked with a star (*):--

† For nature of light, and position and description of station, see
report for 1880.

  *Longstone L.H.†             Thomas O. Hall & James W. Parsons.
  *Inner Farne L.H.            Thomas H. Cutting.
  *No. 5 Buoy, Teesmouth L.V.  Henry Harbord.
  *Coquet Island L.H.          William Evans.
  *Whitby High L.H.            John Odgers.
  *Flamborough Head L.H.       Charles Hood.
  *Spurn L.H.                  James B. Smith.
  *Spurn (Newsand) L.V.        W. Edwards.
  *Outer Dowsing L.V.          William Stock.
  *Inner Dowsing L.V.          William King.
  *Dudgeon L.V.                Thomas Dale.
  *Llyn Wells L.V.             The Principal.
  *Hunstanton L.H.             William Westmoreland.
  *Cromer L.H.                 Richard Comben.
  *Hasbro' L.V.                John Nicholas & B. Darnell.
   Leman & Ower L.V.
   Hasbro' L.H.
  *Newarp L.V.                 Cornelius Campbell & William Rees (mate).
  *Winterton L.H.              John Watson.
  *Cockle L.V.                 Samuel Pender & Charles Perfrement.
  *Corton L.V.                 William John Cotton.
  *Orfordness L.H.             Wm. Wilby Woodruff.
  *Shipwash L.V.               William Bonken.
  *Languard Point L.H.         Owen Boyle.
  *Galloper L.V.               William Littlewood.
   Kentish Knock
  *Swin Middle L.V.            Thomas Barrett.
  *Tongue L.V.                 John Webber.
   Nore L.V.
   North Foreland L.H.
   North Sand Head L.V.
  *Gull L.V.                   Francis Harvey & Joseph Jenkins.
  *South Sand Head L.V.        J. C. Leggett & George Woodward.
  *East Side L.V.              Edward le Gallais & Thomas Rees.
   South Foreland L.H.
  *Hanois L.H. (Guernsey)      Charles Williams.
   Casquets L.H. (Alderney)


SEPARATE REPORT ON EACH SPECIES.

Mistletoe Thrush, _Turdus viscivorus_, Linn.--Longstone L.H., Nov. 10th
and 11th, N.W. to N.N.E., several each day, with Ring Ouzels.

Song Thrush, _T. musicus_, Linn.--Spring, 1882: Heligoland, Feb. 21st,
Mr. Gätke remarks, "musicus: some in my garden, 25th, S.S.W., several.
March 2nd, a few. April 12th, S.S.W., a few; 22nd, pretty numerous; on
23rd, S.S.E. and S., with Ring Ouzels, the two in departing mounting
up in the atmosphere till lost to sight; 29th, some also with Ring
Ouzels." Cromer L.H., May 14th, two killed against lantern at midnight.
Autumn; Heligoland, Sept. 13th, first Thrushes, and at intervals, but
sparingly to November;[5] and the whole of this latter month along with
Fieldfares almost every night pouring overhead; during daytime rarely
any. On the English coast, from the Inner Farne L.H., Sept. 27th, to
the Galloper L.V., Dec. 20th, twenty from 8 to 9 p.m., two struck
and killed; and at the former station they continued to pass through
December, and from Jan. 8rd to 15th in 1883, along with Fieldfares and
Blackbirds. The great rush was on the nights of 12th and 13th October,
very great numbers being observed at stations from the Longstone L.H.
to Galloper L.V., easterly winds, fog and drizzling rain over North Sea.

[Footnote 5: Mr. Gätke's notes are not continued beyond Nov. 30th.]

Redwing, _T. iliacus_, Linn.--Spring, 1882: Great Cotes, second week
in March, returning to coast. Autumn: First, South Sand Head L.V.
(Goodwin), Sept. 28th, forty to fifty to N.W. Longstone L.H., Oct.
8th; Spurn, 13th and 25th, adult males; "rush" Oct. 13th. Heligoland,
Oct. 18th, S.E., great many; 19th, multitudes passing overhead, and at
intervals to Nov. 7th.

Fieldfare, _T. pilaris_, Linn.--Spring, 1882: Heligoland, Jan. 17th and
18th, W., hazy, great many to E.; Feb. 20th and 21st, small flights,
twenty to thirty; March 2nd, great flights overhead. Great Cotes, April
10th, flock, 120 to 150. Autumn: Heligoland, Sept. 13th, S.-S.W.,
thunder-storm with heavy rain, a very great flight; all through
November at night with Thrushes. On English coast. Farne Inner L.H.,
Sept. 27th, one, and subsequently at intervals to end of the year.
Whitby L.H., Oct. 12th, all night; 13th, less. Rush from 11th to 14th
December between Farne Islands and Teesmouth, and again 13th to 15th
January, 1883, but are not recorded anywhere south of Humber.

Blackbird, _T. merula_, Linn.--Spring, 1882: Dudgeon L.V., Feb.
8th, 6 p.m., with Larks. Heligoland, Feb. 21st, N.N.W. to N., "some
in garden"; 25th, S.S.W., some; March 13th and 14th, a few. Cromer
L.H., March 17th, 11 p.m., one struck. Autumn: Heligoland, last week
in October to end of November. English coast, first, Hanois L.H.
(Guernsey), Sept. 19th, 10 p.m., to Jan. 15th, at Inner Farne L.H.
Great "rush," nights of Oct. 10th and 13th; second "rush" Nov. 11th,
Spurn L.V., Hanois L.H., 11th, midnight, and 13th all night; third
"rush," Farne Inner L.H., Dec. 13th, 14th and 15th, and at same
station through December and in less numbers to Jan. 15th, 1883. At
Great Cotes during night of Sept. 28th, S.W. to W., rain, great many
young cocks came in. Swin Middle L.V., Oct. 6th, from 7 p.m. to 3 a.m.,
about one hundred came to lantern and twenty were killed, all young
cocks. Spurn L.V., Nov. 11th, noon, large flock from S.E. to N.W.
Spurn, Oct. 25th, adult males.

King Ouzel, _T. torquatus_, Linn.--Spring: Farne Inner L.H., April 23rd
and 24th, one each day. Heligoland, April 22nd, many; 23rd, same; and
on 29th, some. Autumn: Heligoland, Sept. 17th, E.-N.E., calm, some;
and at intervals to Nov. 7th, an unusually late date, which, however,
corresponds with arrivals on English coast; Sept. 10th, at Cromer, to
Nov. 10th and 11th, at Longstone L.H., several afternoon of each day.
Great rush Oct. 12th and 13th from the mouth of the Tees to Spurn,
old cock birds. Were very numerous in the neighbourhood of Spurn all
through October, all being mature males.

Common Wheatear, _Saxicola œnanthe_ (Linn.).--Spring: Farne Inner L.H.,
March 22nd, 1882, 3 p.m., two. Spurn, 29th, many. Heligoland, April
8th, numerous fine old males; 12th, some at lighthouse. At 5th Buoy
Tees L.V., April 10th to 29th, several coming from E.S.E. towards land,
wind N.E. to N.W. Autumn: Heligoland, June 29th, pretty numerous, young
birds of the year. On the English coast, from Aug. 12th, at the Farne
Inner L.H., several, to Spurn, Oct. 7th, E., rain, evening, several
round lantern. Passed across Heligoland in large numbers in September;
some on Oct. 10th, "great old males."

Eastern Pied Chat, _S. morio_, Ehr.--Heligoland, early in June, a fine
adult male shot.

Whinchat, _Pratincola rubetra_ (Linn.).--Great Cotes, August,
last week, some number of young birds. Spurn, Oct. 15th, all day.
Heligoland, from Aug. 6th, young birds, and throughout month.

Stonechat, _P. rubicola_,--Spring: Heligoland, Feb. 27th, 1882, two
or three; 28th, several; March 1st, one fine old male. Autumn: Great
Cotes, first week in September, many young; October and November, old
birds, sparingly.

Redstart, _Ruticilla phœnicurus_ (Linn.).--Spring: Inner Farne L.H.,
April 22nd and 23rd, some with Wheatears. Autumn: Spurn, Sept. 7th,
one. Longstone L.H., 14th, N.E., 5 p.m., on rocks. Yarmouth, 22nd, a
few; and from Oct. 7th to 13th a few from the Farne Islands southward
to Spurn. Have been comparatively scarce compared with the large
numbers which accompanied the Wheatears on their southward migration up
the coast in the autumns of 1880 and 1881. Across Heligoland from Aug.
10th to first week in October; on the 5th, great many, with Wheatears,
wind E., fresh.

Blackstart, _R. titys_ (Scop.).--Heligoland, March 13th to 14th, one;
17th, eight to ten; and to April 8th, daily, some. Autumn: Spurn, Oct.
29th, one, adult female; stomach contained remains of Coleoptera,
entire ants, and two large seeds. Migrates earlier in the spring and
later in the autumn than the Redstart.

Red-spotted Bluethroat, _Cyanecula suecica_ (Linn.).--Heligoland, Sept.
16th, E.N.E., in great numbers, with Redstarts, Goldcrests, Wheatears,
&c.; 20th, S.E., fresh, many; 23rd, very numerous. At Spurn, Sept.
11th, two immature, one obtained. It appears yet to be an open question
with ornithologists whether the young of suecica are distinguishable
from those of leucocyana in the plumage of the first year; the Spurn
bird therefore may be an example of the Central European form, the
White-spotted Bluethroat.

Redbreast, _Erithacus rubecula_ (Linn.).--Spring: Heligoland, March
13th and 14th, several; April 8th, 22nd and 23rd, some. Autumn: across
island, from Sept. 8th, N., calm, overcast, through October, in large
numbers; great rush, Oct. 17th, 18th and 19th; again on 27th and 28th.
At Orfordness and Languard Point lighthouses and Ship wash L.V., on
Sept. 20th, and from Oct. 6th to 25th between the Longstone L.H. and
East Goodwin L.V., in great numbers. Great rush Oct. 8th, and again
night of 13th at many stations and in large numbers. At the Galloper
L.V., on 6th, with Wrens.

Sylviinæ.--Whitethroat, _Sylvia cinerea_ (Linn.), Hanois L.H., April
16th, 3 a.m., some killed. Heligoland, April 22nd and 23rd, S.S.E.
and S., some. Spurn L.H., May 7th, 11 p.m., misty, rain, one killed.
Cromer L.H., June 17th, 9.50 p.m., 6 a.m., two and a Wren killed.
Autumn: Cromer L.H., July 18th, 3 a.m., S.W., seven stunned. During
September and first week in October at several stations during night.
Blackcap, _S. atricapilla_ (Linn.), Heligoland, April 23rd, some; 28th,
many. Lesser Whitethroat, _S. curruca_ (Linn.), also some. Heligoland,
in the autumn. Whitethroats on Aug. 6th, and through September in
great numbers to Oct. 7th. Garden Warbler from Aug. 19th to end of
September. Blackcap as late as Oct. 27th.

Golden-crested Wren, _Regulus cristatus_, Koch.--Spring, 1882:
Heligoland, March 13th and 14th, several, and on to April 12th. Autumn:
the autumn of 1882 will be long remembered amongst ornithologists
from the extraordinary immigration of Goldcrests on to the east
coasts of Scotland and England. On the east coast of England the
migration extended over ninety-two days, commencing Aug. 6th. Cromer
L.H., midnight, two stunned against lantern, and a week later at
Redcar, Aug. 13th, wind S.W., forty to fifty, at 8 a.m., seen on the
breakwater, and forward, at many stations and in immense numbers, to
Nov. 5th, Cockle L.V., 5 a.m., one caught against glass. They arrived
somewhat sparingly in August and through September, and day after day
in enormous numbers in October; in this month they are recorded at
twenty-one stations between the Farne Islands and the Hanois L.H.,
off Guernsey. There appear to have been two great rushes, one on the
night of Oct. 7th and morning of 8th, and again on night of 12th
and morning of 13th, the latter with the Woodcock.[6] Many also are
likewise reported during the month to have alighted on fishing-boats,
steam-vessels, &c., in the North Sea. At Heligoland, on Oct. 8th, all
the island swarmed with them; they had also been exceedingly numerous
there from Sept. 8th, continuing also to arrive and depart throughout
October, and on the night from 28th to 29th Mr. Gätke remarks, "a
perfect storm of Goldcrests we have had,--poor little souls!--perching
on the ledges of the window-panes of the lantern of our lighthouse,
preening their feathers in the glare of the lamps; on the 29th all the
island swarmed with them, filling the gardens everywhere, and over all
the cliff--hundreds of thousands; by 9 a.m. most of them had passed on
again." On English coast, Farne Inner L.H., Oct. 8th, "never remember
seeing so many at one time." Whitby L.H., 8th and 12th, "great rush."
Flamborough, 7th to 14th, "never more seen." Spurn, 7th to 8th, "in
turnip-fields, hedges, and everywhere, never more seen." Great Cotes,
8th, great many everywhere, and even on the piles of timber on the
dock-quays and timber-yards at Grimsby. Dudgeon L.V., 12th, "flock
to W." Cromer L.H., 10th and 12th, latter night "large flocks," and
at other stations, too numerous to detail, in large numbers. General
direction E. to W., and E.S.E. to W.N.W., winds easterly over North Sea
nights of 7th and 12th, with fogs and drizzling rain on latter night.
These small wanderers reached the land in a very exhausted state, and
great numbers are supposed to have perished in mid-passage.

[Footnote 6: At this date the stream of Goldcrests extended quite
across England, the Irish Channel, and into Ireland.]

It is curious that the Fire-crested Wren, _R. ignicapillus_ (C. L.
Brehm), has not been observed at Heligoland during the autumn, although
generally it is tolerably numerous.

At the Newarp L.V., in March and April, 1883, an immense migration of
various birds was observed almost day by day; amongst those on April
14th three Golden-crested Wrens going eastward.

Phylloscopinæ.--Spring: East Yorkshire, Chiffchaff, _Phylloscopus
collybita_ (Vieill.), March 13th. Willow Wren, P. trochilus (Linn.),
Heligoland, April 22nd and 23rd, some. Autumn: Spurn and East
Lincolnshire, first week in September, many; latest. Spurn, Oct. 25th.
Chiffchaff also at Spurn on 29th. Heligoland, Willow Wren, Aug. 15th,
some, and forward in great numbers to Oct. 19th. Chiffchaff, Sept.
21st, and a great number at intervals to Oct. 27th. Wood Wren, _P.
sibilatrix_ (Bechst.), Oct. 27th, one. Yellow-browed Warbler, _P.
superciliosus_ (Gm.), Oct. 23rd, W., one; 27th, S.W., one seen.

Acrocephalinæ.--Spring: Spurn, May 29th, 11 p.m., misty, two Reed
Warblers, _Acrocephalus streperus_ (Vieill.), killed against lantern;
Spurn, Aug. 20th, midnight, three old males killed; Great Cotes, Sept.
2nd, in bean-fields. On Sept. 12th, 1881, two Grasshopper Warblers,
_Locustella nævia_ (Bodd.), were killed in the night against the
lantern of Spurn lighthouse (omitted in report for 1881). Heligoland,
Sept. 19th, one Grasshopper Warbler.

Hedgesparrow, _Accentor modularis_ (Linn.).--Spring: Heligoland,
March 12th, some; 13th and 14th, some; 20th to April 12th, daily
some. Autumn: At Spurn and in East Lincolnshire great numbers were
observed during the first fortnight in September. Spurn, Oct. 8th,
most abundant, and on the Lincolnshire side, same date, extraordinary
numbers; in some localities, as stack-yards and marsh hedgerows,
swarming. Heligoland, Sept. 20th, S.E., beginning to arrive; 22nd,
great many; on Oct. 6th and 7th, marvellous numbers; also on 8th, and
continuing to arrive and pass forward in very great numbers up to the
29th. It will be seen that their extraordinary abundance at Spurn and
in East Lincolnshire on Oct. 8th corresponds with the immense flight
at Heligoland at the same period, Oct. 6th, 7th and 8th. At Languard
Point, on March 1st, 1883, a large flock was seen at 12.30 p.m., going
eastward.

Bearded Reedling, _Panurus biarmicus_ (Linn.).--Heligoland, Oct. 9th,
S.S.E., later thick and hazy, one, a male.

Paridæ.--Autumn: Heligoland, Blue Titmouse, _Parus cœrulæus_, Linn.,
Sept. 20th, beginning; Oct. 23rd, some. Great Titmouse, _P. major_,
Linn., Oct. 7th, a sprinkling; 8th, numerous; 14th, great many. Coal
Titmouse, _P. ater_, Linn., one on Oct. 15th; _Paridæ_ continuing
to pass up to 29th. Languard Point L.H., Oct. 29th, one Long-tailed
Titmouse. Galloper L.V., Oct. 8th, one Titmouse dead on deck. Farne
Inner L.H., Oct. 13th, E.S.E., Great and Blue Titmouse, old males,
many. 5 Buoy Tees L.V., 13th, 3 p.m., five on board. Newarp L.V.,
several on deck, with Goldcrests and Redbreasts. Two "rushes," Oct. 8th
and 13th, with Goldcrests.

Common Wren, _Troglodytes parvulus_, Koch.--Spring: Flamborough L.H.,
March 18th, W., many round lantern, several struck. Hunstanton L.H.,
17th, 3 a.m., S.W., one caught against lantern. Corton L.V., April
14th, one, E. to W. Cromer L.H., June 17th, 9.50 p.m., two struck, one
killed. Autumn: Heligoland, Oct. 9th, S.S.E., calm, a great many; 14th,
many. Flamborough L.H., Sept. 15th, Spurn L.H., 20th, Galloper L.V.,
21st, and Shipwash L.V., 26th, a great many, both during day and night.
Oct. 7th to 8th and 12th to 13th, great rushes at six stations from
Farne Islands to Galloper L.V.; at the latter on night of 12th many
round lantern, and night of 13th, 8 p.m. to daybreak of 14th, with many
other birds, Larks, Starlings, Thrushes, and two Robins--altogether
many thousands of birds; 160 of various species picked up on deck, and
it is calculated one thousand struck and went overboard.

Motacillidæ.--Spring: Heligoland, Feb. 20th, 1882, Pied Wagtail,
_Motacilla lugubris_, Temm., one fine old male, "never so early; once
I got one on Feb, 28th"; April 23rd, Blue-headed Wagtail, _M. flava_,
Linn., some; Yellow Wagtail, _M. raii_, Bp., one; 28th, _flava_ pretty
numerous. Inner Farne L.H., March 29th, one Pied Wagtail. 5 Buoy
Tees L.V., 28th and 29th, 8 a.m. to 3 p.m., great many in flocks of
about twenty, flying S.E. to N.W. Whitby L.H., 23rd, many. Autumn:
Heligoland, Aug. 14th, White Wagtail, _M. alba_, Linn., some; Sept.
9th, _M. flava_, many. Great Cotes, Sept. 2nd, Grey Wagtail, _M.
melanope_, flocks of twenty to thirty in bean-fields; only one old bird
seen. Spurn, 7th, several. Heligoland, April 26th, W.N.W., Richard's
Pipit, _Anthus richardii_, Vieill., one, a small male bird; 28th, one
male, very pale, but not faded or abraded. Autumn: Heligoland, Sept.
28th, S.W., fresh, _A. richardii_, a few; Oct. 8th, a few shot. Meadow
Pipit, _A. pratensis_ (Linn.), Sept. 7th, potato-fields crowded with
them, and up to Oct. 19th a great many; Oct. 17th, marvellous numbers.
Tree Pipit, _A. trivialis_ (Linn.), Sept. 19th to Oct. 11th, numerous.
Rock Pipit, _A. obscurus_ (Lath.), some with _pratensis_. Great Cotes,
Sept. 2nd, Meadow and Tree Pipits in small flocks in bean-fields. Inner
Dowsing L.V., Sept. 12th, fifty Titlarks during day. Farne Inner L.H.,
Nov. 20th, 2 p.m., sixty to S.W.

Laniidæ.--Spring: Spurn, May 28th. Red-backed Shrike, _Lanius
collurio_, Linn., two, male and female, night of 27th or morning of
28th. Autumn: Great Grey Shrike, _L. excubitor_, Linn., Spurn, Sept.
18th, one; 19th, one; and several during the first fortnight in
October. Heligoland, Oct. 5th, _L. major_, one, a second during day;
15th, one; 18th, _L. excubitor_, one, an old male.

Waxwing, _Ampelis garrulus_, Linn.--Heligoland, Nov. 21st, one female.
Seaton Carew, Jan. 5th, 1883, several seen near Middlesborough and
Guisborough, some shot. Cleethorpes, near Grimsby, early morning,
15th, one in a garden close to coast; same time, one near Wragby,
Lincolnshire; 17th, large flocks, several scores, near Goole, fourteen
obtained. Several also in Norfolk near East Coast early in 1883.

Muscicapidæ.--Pied Flycatcher, _M. atricapilla_, Linn.--Heligoland,
June 27th, pretty numerous, young, and forward to Sept. 20th in large
numbers; during the latter time with many Spotted Flycatchers, _M.
grisola_. Spurn, Sept. 12th, Pied Flycatchers, a few, very small birds
comparatively, measuring one inch less in length than those obtained in
1881. The Common Flycatcher was last observed in North Lincolnshire on
Sept. 25th. "Flycatchers" are frequently mentioned as occurring round
the lanterns at night; it is, however, impossible to say what birds are
intended, as the term is used indiscriminately for many of the small
insect-eating birds.

Hirundinidæ.--Swallow, _H. rustica_, Linn.--Spring: First at
Hunstanton L.H., April 13th, several. Heligoland, April 23rd. Longstone
L.H., May 1st. Autumn: Heligoland, August to Oct. 31st, with House
Martins at the latter date. Sand Martins crossed the island on Aug.
15th, and large numbers of both _rustica_ and _urbica_ from Sept.
13th to 19th. On East Coast of England, Great Cotes, Aug. 12th, dusk,
starlight, about one hundred N.E. to S.W.; main body passed up the
coast in September, and very few seen after first week in October. The
last occurrences are North-East Lincolnshire, Nov. 8th, two at Laceby.
Flamborough, Nov. 11th, N., cold, two about lighthouse. Patrington,
Yorkshire, on Oct. 27th I saw ten or twelve House Martins hawking in
the village street.

Goldfinch, _Carduelis elegans_, Steph.--Spring: Spurn, April 20th,
11 a.m., six from S. remaining all day. Autumn: Spurn and East
Lincolnshire, some in October. Heligoland, Oct. 16th, a few.

Siskin, _Chrysomitris spinus_ (Linn.).--Seaton Carew, Durham, Oct.
19th, one. Spurn, 25th, a few. Heligoland, Oct. 16th and on to 23rd,
some.

Greenfinch, _Ligurinus chloris_ (Linn.).--N. E. Lincolnshire, Feb. 5th,
1883, large flocks on stubbles near the coast. Great Cotes, Sept. 7th,
large migratory flocks in bean-fields and on stubbles during month,
feeding on seeds of _Atriplex angustifolia_ and _Polygonum aviculare_,
showing a decided preference for the latter. Languard L.H., Oct. 23rd,
very large flock came in at noon.

Hawfinch, _Coccothraustes vulgaris_, Pall.--Inner Dowsing L.V., Oct.
20th, S.S.W. [No. 5], two came on board and remained all night, then in
the morning left, flying S.E. to N.W. At Heligoland, Mr. Gätke says,
"the Hawfinch here is a well-known customer, never in any numbers, but
every spring and fall some, betraying itself forthwith by its peculiar
call-note, so out of all proportion with its colossal beak."

Common Sparrow, _Passer domesticus_ (Linn.).--From Sept. 23rd, Shipwash
L.V., "flights to N.N.W. to Farne Inner L.V.," Nov. 2nd, eight House
Sparrows, "seldom seen here." Altogether observed at twelve stations,
with one exception, as above, all south of the Humber. Goodwin L.V.,
Sept. 27th to Nov. 14th, on ten days large and continuous flights to
W., and in large numbers in October at other stations.

Tree Sparrow, _P. montanus_ (Linn.).--Spring: Heligoland, March 20th,
a score; April 24th, daily; and 15th to 20th, some; 29th, "eating off
buds of gooseberries in garden." Corton L.V., June 8th, one on board.
Autumn: Shipwash L.V., Sept. 22nd, 2 to 6 p.m., large numbers to S.W.,
to Spurn, Oct. 25th; altogether at seven stations south of the Humber
in very considerable numbers in October.

Chaffinch, _Fringilla cœlebs_, Linn.--Corton L.V., from Sept. 28th,
"several flocks during forenoon to W.," to Galloper L.V., Oct. 14th, 9
p.m. to 4 a.m., "many with Larks." Seven stations report Chaffinches,
all in October, between the Tees and South Sand Head L.V., Goodwins.
Heligoland, Oct. 6th and 7th, enormous numbers crossed--hundreds of
thousands.

Brambling, _F. montifringilla_, Linn.--Heligoland, March 13th and 14th,
1882, one each day; April 8th a few, and on to 28th. Autumn: Longstone
L.H., Sept. 21st, 10 a.m., N.E., fresh and stormy, several. Spurn, Oct.
9th, some; 18th, an immense flock of males, extending two hundred yards
in length, and flying as closely as a flock of Knots. Teesmouth, 12th
and 13th, some. Heligoland, Sept. 4th, E. by N., some; Oct. 19th, great
many.

Linnet, _Linota cannabina_ (Linn.).--Scarcely any reported.[7] Lesser
Redpoll, _L. rufescens_ (Vieill.), a few in N. E. Lincolnshire, first
week in September. Spurn, October, several. Heligoland, Oct. 24th,
storm S.W., No. 11, one, "first capture of species on island"; Nov.
7th, S.E., windy and heavy rain, one shot in garden, second specimen.
Twite, _L. flavirostris_ (Linn.), Heligoland, scarcely any during
autumn. Spurn, Oct. 25th, some small flocks, examples obtained had very
pink rumps.

[Footnote 7: East Coast of Scotland, vast rush in October (9th to
23rd). See J. A. H. B., p. 14 of Report.]

Common Bullfinch, _Pyrrhula europæa_, Vieill.--Hasbro' L.V., Oct. 12th,
4 p.m., two S.E. to N.W.

Common Crossbill, _Loxia curvirostra_, Linn.--Farne Inner L.H., July
15th, one found near lighthouse, had been dead some days.

Emberizidæ.--Yellow Bunting, _E. citrinella_, Linn., Hunstanton L.H.,
Oct. 23rd, 10.30 a.m., great many round lighthouse. Ortolan Bunting,
_E. hortulana_, Linn., Heligoland, April 28th and 29th, some. Meadow
Bunting, _E. cia_, Linn., Heligoland, March 8th, S.S.W., clear, warm
and fine, a fine old male, the first after forty years. Reed Bunting,
_E. schœniclus_, Linn., Great Cotes, first week in September, many
in bean-fields. Autumn: Heligoland, Aug. 14th, Ortolan Bunting, some;
28th, numerous; first fortnight in October, _E. schœniclus_, great many
daily; 17th, great many, and to end of month.

Snow Bunting, _Plectrophanes nivalis_ (Linn.).--Spring: Heligoland,
Feb. 28th, 1882, great many; March 28th, many. 5 Buoy Tees L.V., Spurn,
and Inner Farne, in March; large flocks at Spurn on 4th. Autumn: A
few old birds in September; 7th and 8th, one each day at Skitter
Haven, within the Humber. Young birds first at Great Cotes, Sept.
28th; occurred at stations north of Humber in October, November, and
December, to January 2nd. Teesmouth, Dec. 1st, large flocks preceding
the heavy snow-storm on 5th. Heligoland, Oct. 24th, S.S.E., strong and
increasing, thick, "with thousands of others during forenoon racing
past overhead"; night, storm S.W. [No. 11]; 29th, "in great masses in
the fields"; and at intervals great numbers to Nov. 21st.

Sky Lark, _Alauda arvensis_, Linn.--Spring: Heligoland, Jan. 18th,
1882, N.N.W., all night great many, all day thousands upon thousands
over island, all to E.; miles out at sea the same; Feb. 8th and 9th,
great numbers across island; 10th and 11th, the same with Starlings,
all to W.; 15th, S.W., rain, from early morning and all day, thousands
from the east. Starlings same, all very high; 25th, S.S.W., early,
calm and fine, "flights on flights" to E. by N.; 28th, Woodlark, _A.
arborea_, Linn., "a small party, the first"; March 2nd, a flight.
Spurn, March 27th, flocks of Sky Larks all day passing. Autumn: First
at Galloper L.V., Sept. 20th, midnight to 4 p.m., "shoals," to Jan.
10th, 1883, at 5 Buoy Tees L.V.; altogether at twenty-nine stations,
crossing the whole east coast of England, and in immense numbers both
by night and day, direction E. to W., or S.E. to N.W.; Oct. 7th and
8th, great "rushes," again 10th and 13th, and again on 20th; Nov. 12th,
and on Dec. 13th to 15th inclusive, in the latter case up the coast
from N. to S., as well as directly inland from sea. Larks appear to
have been tolerably equally distributed over the whole coast-line,
and as usual to have crossed the North Sea in enormous numbers, far
outnumbering any other species. At Heligoland, in the autumn, they
appear, from Mr. Gätke's notes, to have passed on Oct. 11th, "great
many passing above fog," call-notes heard; and subsequently in large
numbers to Nov. 21st.

Shore Lark, _Otocorys alpestris_ (Linn.)--Spring: Heligoland, March
20th, eight to ten; April 8th, E. by N., great many flights of twenty
or over; 9th, same; 11th, very numerous; 14th, flights of thirty to
forty; and to 24th, some daily. Autumn: Oct. 4th, great many; 6th,
"some" (that means with us here, say a hundred); and subsequently at
intervals to 28th, when they passed by thousands; Nov. 27th, many still
passing over. Spurn, Oct. 26th, flock of seven; November and December,
tolerably abundant; about eighty shot near Yarmouth in October, the
greater portion being male birds.

Starling, _Sturnus vulgaris_, Linn.--Spring: April 4th, flocks to
N. Autumn: First at Whitby, Aug. 3rd, 4th, and 5th, great many near
lighthouse to Dec. 15th, at Spurn; altogether at nineteen stations
covering the east coast of England, the bulk crossing in October;
great rush from 10th to 13th inclusive, from E. to W. and to W.S.W.
Heligoland, Oct. 10th, flights of sixty to seventy; 22nd, S. by E.,
flights of "hundreds of thousands," and great many to Nov. 13th.
Rose-coloured Starling, _Pastor roseus_ (Linn.), Sept. 24th, S.E.,
calm, one young bird.

Common Jay, _Garrulus glandarius_ (Linn.).--Heligoland, Oct. 6th,
strong, clear, later stormy, "flights of hundreds"; Oct. 7th, S.E.,
clear, not warm, blowing nearly a gale, "without interruption thousands
on thousands passing overhead like Crows"; 8th, S.E., fresh, clear,
"actually still more than yesterday, over the sea north and south
of the island, multitudes like a continual stream--never seen such
masses"; 15th, eight to ten. Mem.: "Jays requiring strong, dry, clear
east wind; Tits and _pratensis_ the same; Chaffinches want east wind
strong, but overcast, and cloudy sky." The great abundance of the Jay
in our English woodlands has been remarked upon from many districts
during the winter of 1882-83; more especially, however, south of a line
drawn from Flamborough Head to Portland Bill, Dorset.

Magpie, _Pica rustica_ (Scop.).--Spurn L.H., March 24th, remained in
neighbourhood three days. Weybourne, Norfolk, Oct. 16th, arrival of
Magpies noticed.--J. H. G.

Daw, _Corvus monedula_, Linn.--At several stations with Rooks in
October and November. Heligoland, Oct. 6th, about one hundred; 24th,
towards evening, flights of about five hundred; 27th, one shot from
a flock with light grey neck; on this day all birds in great haste,
flying as a rule _very_ high; enormous flocks of Jackdaws seen but as
the finest dust; of many birds only heard call-notes without being able
to see them; wind S., S.E., and E. by S.

Carrion Crow, _C. corone_, Linn.--First at Orfordness L.H., Sept. 23rd,
seven to N.E.; and at several stations from Farne Inner L.H. to Goodwin
L.V., in October, November, and December; sometimes with Hooded Crows,
occasionally in separate flocks. On Oct. 9th, at Spurn, Mr. Hewetson
shot a Crow from a flock passing inland, which had a few white feathers
under the chin and some of the claws white. Heligoland, Oct. 27th, a
small flight.

Hooded Crow, _C. cornix_, Linn.--Spring: Spurn L.H., March 11th, to
S., many all day. Corton L.V., from March 21st to April 14th, large
numbers of Rooks and Hooded Crows going from W. to E. Heligoland, March
2nd, flights high over head to E.; March 4th, same; 12th, N.W., clear,
great flights to E.; 13th and 14th, same; and to 17th, pretty numerous
daily; April 8th, very many high overhead; 9th, same; 11th, great
many. Longstone L.H., April 31st, eleven came on island, appeared much
fatigued, and then left for land, mod. gale N.N.W. Inner Farne L.H.,
16th and 17th, many to W.S.W.; a great many Crows (Rooks?) same time.
Autumn: Orfordness L.H., Sept. 19th, first seen, one. In large numbers
through October and November at stations from Farne Islands to Goodwin
light-vessels; great rush Oct. 11th and 13th. Nothing special to note
of migration across Heligoland in the autumn, which as usual was in
immense numbers in October and November. As a rule, few Hooded Crows
cross south of Languard Point, and few Carrion Crows north of Spurn.
Rooks and Jackdaws sparingly north of Spurn, and gradually increase
southward; and most plentiful at southern stations.

Rook, _C. frugilegus_, Linn.--Spring: Heligoland. Feb. 22nd, N.W., a
very great flight; 28th, several flights going due E.; March 4th, same;
13th and 14th, less. Autumn: Sparingly north of the Humber, and in
large numbers at the southern stations throughout October and November,
and on to the middle of December. Immense numbers remain in North
Lincolnshire during the winter, feeding in the lowlands on both sides
of the Humber, and moving in the afternoon to the high wolds, where at
dusk they retire to the great woods to roost.

Raven, _C. corax_, Linn.--Whitby L.H., May 20th, one, "comes each year
about this time."

Common Swift, _Cypselus apus_ (Linn.).--Hunstanton L.H., May 22nd,
several. Autumn: Spurn L.H., June 17th, 18th, and 20th, great many to
S., sometimes a flock remaining on gallery of lantern at night. Corton
L.V., Aug. 1st, many to W. Heligoland, Aug. 14th, S., some.

At the Inner Farne L.H., Aug. 19th, "a very large Swift, supposed to
be a foreigner, flying about island." About the end of July an Alpine
Swift, _C. melba_, Linn., was shot by Mr. Wm. Rogerson, of Newcastle,
at Alnmouth, Northumberland, and recorded at the time in the 'Newcastle
Journal,' Aug. 2nd, 1882, as 9¼ inches in length, and 21 inches between
the tips of the wings; and that it was identified by Mr. John Hancock.

Common Nightjar, _Caprimulgus europæus_, Linn.--Spurn, Sept. 11th, one.

Wryneck, _Jynx torquilla_, Linn.--Heligoland, April 23rd, several.

Kingfisher, _Alcedo ispida_, Linn.--Great Cotes, Sept. 1st, several in
marshes. Hasbro' L.V., 23rd, 10 p.m., one struck lantern and killed,
was flying S.E. to N.W.

Hoopoe, _Upupa epops_, Linn.--Heligoland, April 23rd, one. Spurn, Aug.
18th, one shot on Kilnsea Warren. Inner Farne, Aug. 29th, one shot on
mainland; one also near Yarmouth in October.

Cuckoo, _Cuculus canorus_, Linn.--Spurn, May 1st. Whitby, 8th. Inner
Farne, 11th. One on each occasion.

Striges, Owls.--Long-eared Owl, _Asio otus_ (Linn.), Languard L.H.,
Oct. 26th, 4.30 p.m., one. Short-eared Owl, _A. accipitrinus_,
Heligoland, scarcely any. On English coast also remarkably scarce;
a few during the first fortnight in October at stations from Redcar
to Languard Point; appears to have come over at the same time as the
Woodcocks, from Oct. 11th to 13th. Hasbro' L.V., Nov. 16th, one "Grey
Owl" at sunrise to W.

Falconidæ.--Heligoland, March 4th, 1882, S.E. to S.W. Greenland
Falcon, _Falco candicans_, Gmel., a very fine white bird. Sparrowhawk,
_Accipiter nisus_ (Linn.), Sept. 15th, great many over the sea north of
the island, none on Heligoland; 19th, following flights of Chaffinches;
Oct. 5th, many with Kestrels also, and on to 12th. Sea Eagle,
_Haliaëtus albicilla_ (Linn.), Sept. 16th, Nov. 13th, 14th, and 20th,
one each day. Peregrine Falcon, _Falco peregrinus_, Tunstall, Sept.
20th, some, and many young Merlins. Merlin, _F. æsalon_, Nov. 12th,
a very red-breasted old male obtained. Hen Harrier, _Circus cyaneus_
(Linn.), Nov. 20th, one. On English coast. Kestrels, a few in September
and October. Sparrowhawks from Aug. 3rd to September, and through
October; also Jan. 9th, 1883, Goodwin L.V., one; not unfrequently
alight in the evening on the rigging of the light-vessels, leaving
again at daybreak. One, caught on the Corton L.V., Aug. 3rd, had a
piece of copper wire round one leg. An Osprey was seen near Lowestoft
on Oct. 7th; a Honey Buzzard shot at Welwick, near Spurn, on Sept.
15th; and another, Dereham, Norfolk, on Oct. 3rd; a few Buzzards were
seen about Spurn in October. Altogether the larger birds of prey have
been extremely scarce during the autumn.

Gannet, _Sula bassana_ (Linn.).--Longstone L.H., March 15th, flocks
to north from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., and to end of month between the same
hours; also first week in April between same hours; Oct. 20th to 24th,
flocks flying north, old and young, but mostly old birds. Dudgeon L.V.,
Oct. 8th, eight off light-ship all day. Orfordness, Dec. 6th to 7th,
"flocks to W. along shore."

Ardeidæ.--Common Heron, _Ardea cinerea_, Linn., Aug. 6th, 7 p.m., five
to N. Hanois L.H., Sept. 17th, two to W., twenty to S.W. Bittern,
_Botaurus stellaris_ (Linn.), Hornsea, Dec. 22nd.

Anatidæ, Geese.--Farne Inner L.H., Feb. 9th, twenty-one Brent Geese to
E.S.E. Kilnsea, Spurn, June 5th, eight large Grey Geese to S., flying
very low. Longstone L.H., Oct. 15th, nine Wild Geese; one, wounded
against lantern and subsequently shot, was a Barnacle Goose, _Bernicla
leucopsis_. Farne Inner, Nov. 13th, three Canada Geese shot from flock
of eleven on one of the outlying islands; large flocks of Grey Geese
going south along coast early in December.

Swans.--5 Buoy Tees L.V., Aug. 5th, six young Swans in Tees. Newarp
L.V., Oct. 26th, three Swans to W. Spurn L.H., Nov. 28th, 9 a.m., ten
passed close to lantern. Dudgeon L.V., 24th, fifty all white close past
ship to W. Teesmouth, 24th, 9 a.m., six.

Ducks.--5 Buoy Tees L.V., April 25th, twenty-five Sheldrake, _Tadorna
cornuta_ (Gmel.), seen in Tees. Inner Farne L.H., May 2nd, one solitary
King Eider, _S. spectabilis_ (Linn.), first time seen this season.
Longstone L.H., Sept. 4th, Scaup Duck flying N. Large flights of
various Ducks seen on east coast at many stations in October to end of
the year; direction of flight, however, not sufficiently persistent
to permit any deductions; many doubtless were flocks changing their
feeding-grounds.

Columbidæ.--Spurn, May 24th, two Turtle Doves, _Turtur communis_,
Selby. Gull L.V., July 9th, 7.30 p.m., twenty Wood Pigeons, _C.
palumbus_, Linn., to N.W. Spurn, Sept. 7th, Turtle Dove, young. Farne
Inner L.H., Dec. 20th, 10 a.m., two Wood Pigeons to E.N.E.

Rallidæ.--Inner Farne L.H., Sept. 12th, Landrail, _Crex pratensis_,
Bechst., killed against lantern during night. Spurn, 18th, one shot.

Crane, _Grus communis_, Bechst.--Heligoland, April 12th, one, not
captured.

Little Bustard, _Otis tetrax_, Linn.--Heligoland, one shot, first
occasion.

Charadriadæ.--Spurn, May 30th, Turnstone, _Strepsilas interpres_
(Linn.), small flock in full summer plumage. Spurn, first week in
June, Dotterel, _C. morinellus_, four seen. The Golden Plover, _C.
pluvialis_, Linn., was first seen at Farne Inner L.H., Aug. 17th; small
flocks on island; on the same day also, in Great Cotes marshes, in
summer plumage. Yarmouth, Sept. 10th, four, partially in summer dress.
Grey Plover, _S. helvetica_ (Linn.), first at Teesmouth, Aug. 10th,
two. Spurn, Sept. 7th, first seen; on 16th, three large flocks, many
members of each in full summer plumage. 5 Buoy Tees L.V., Oct. 15th and
16th, Grey Plover with Curlew, two to three hundred in flock. Whitby
L.H., Nov. 14th, one hundred or more. Immense flocks of Lapwings,
_Vanellus vulgaris_, Bechst., at Farne Islands, Sept. 25th and 26th,
and subsequently at many other stations during the winter. Kentish
Plover, _Æ. cantiana_ (Lath.), was obtained near Blakeney about Sept.
26th. Heligoland, young Golden Plover commenced passing, Aug. 9th;
during July and up to the end of the month, every night, great numbers
of _Numenius_, _Totanus_, _Tringa_, and _C. hiaticula_, &c., crossed;
on Aug. 25th, great numbers of Golden Plovers; on the 22nd, S.W., great
many Dotterel, _C. morinellus_ (Linn.); again Sept. 4th, great many
Dotterel, 11 p.m., passing overhead E. to W., one flight taking ten
minutes to pass.

Scolopacidæ.--Red-necked Phalarope, _Phalaropus hyperboreus_ (Linn.),
Breydon, Norfolk, Sept. 4th, one shot, two seen. Common Snipe,
_Gallinago cælestis_ (Frenzel), end of second week in March, 1882, N.
E. Lincolnshire, returning in some numbers. Heligoland, March 2nd, one;
April 12th, S.S.W., a few. Autumn: Farne Inner L.H., Sept. 14th, Snipe
to W. Orfordness, Oct. 13th, 8 p.m., one killed. Flamborough L.H., Nov.
16th, two struck and killed, strong S.E. gale. Gull L.V., Nov. 3rd,
about one hundred to W. Jack Snipe, _G. gallinula_ (Linn.), Longstone
L.H., Sept. 21st, E.N.E. to N.E., one killed against S.E. side lantern.
Farne Inner L.H., Oct. 12th, two. Woodcock, _Scolopax rusticula_,
Linn., Spurn, Sept. 18th, first Woodcock; the great flight took place
on the night of Oct. 12th, wind E., strong, fog and drizzling rain; on
the morning of 13th at Farne Inner, 5 Buoy Tees L.V.,[8] Teesmouth,
Coquet, Whitby, Flamborough, Spurn, Yarmouth, and Orfordness, in
some numbers; specially so at Farne Inner, Teesmouth, Flamborough,
and Spurn. Second flight, Teesmouth, Nov. 13th; and at Whitby, 11th;
Farne, Dec. 14th; and Coquet, 14th. Woodcocks occurred at Heligoland
on Oct. 26th, a few; 29th, twenty to thirty shot; Nov. 11th, some;
and 21st and 30th, some. Dunlin, _Tringa alpina_, Linn., Great Cotes,
Aug. 16th, night warm, close, thunder-storm, very dark, heavy rain
from S.E., flocks of waders passing over. Dunlin and Kinged Plover.
Curlew Sandpiper, _T. subarquata_ (Güld.), Spurn, Sept. 14th, a few.
Ruff, _Machetes pugnax_, Linn., Seaton Carew, Nov. 2nd, two Ruffs and
a Reeve. Knot, _T. canutus_, Linn., Teesmouth, Aug. 11th, one; 15th,
three. Great Cotes, 27th, flock of about two hundred. Spurn, Sept.
6th, several; plentiful by middle of month. Spurn L.H., Nov. 15th, 3
a.m., many round lantern. Hasbro' L.V., 16th, 11 a.m., large flocks
very high E. to W.S.W. Sanderling, _Calidris arenaria_ (Linn.)., Spurn,
May 31st, flocks, some in summer and others in transition plumage.
Lincolnshire coast, Aug. 10th, flocks, thirty to forty, old and young
together, near Somercotes. Green Sandpiper, _Totanus ochropus_ (Linn.),
Breydon, Aug. 15th, plentiful. Common Redshank, _T. calidris_ (Linn.),
scarce. Spotted Redshank, _T. fuscus_ (Linn.), Breydon, Aug. 15th,
one, immature, shot. Greenshank, _T. cancescens_ (Gmel.), Breydon,
Aug. 15th, plentiful. Red-breasted Snipe, _Macrorhamphus griseus_
(Gmel.), Aug. 15th, one shot at Cleethorpes, near Grimsby, a mature
bird in moult from the knot-like plumage of summer to the grey of
winter. Bar-tailed Godwit, _Limosa lapponica_ (Linn.), Teesmouth, Aug.
13th, 4.30 a.m., five. Black-tailed Godwit, _L. ægocephala_ (Linn.),
Aug. 24th, four seen at Breydon, two in summer plumage. Whimbrel,
_Numenius phæopus_ (Linn.), 5 Buoy, Tees L.V., April 23rd, one N.W. to
S.E. Great Cotes, July 27th, Whimbrel passing, first of the season.
Teesmouth, Aug. 1st to 7th, two or three small flocks about; and large
flocks to E. early on morning of 16th. Common Curlew, _N. arquata_
(Linn.), Heligoland, April 12th, from 10 p.m. to daylight, hundreds of
thousands of _Tringa_, _Numenius_, _Hæmatopus_, and the like flying
over. Lincolnshire coast, Aug. 10th, flocks of eight to ten young, on
shore near Somercotes. South Sand Head L.V., Sept. 17th, twelve, the
first seen, to N.W. 5 Buoy Tees L.V., Oct. 15th and 16th, flocks of two
to three hundred passing. Whitby L.H., Oct. 15th, large flock round
lantern for several hours, thick and dark. Cromer L.H., Oct. 13th,
large flock round lantern. Spurn L.H., Nov. 15th, 3 a.m., many round
lantern with Knots. Flamboro' L.H., 16th, many round lantern; and on
Dec. 13th, all night with Larks.

[Footnote 8: At this light-vessel a single bird passed, going west, at
daybreak.]

Sterninæ, Terns.--Inner Farne L.H., April 20th, Sandwich Tern, _Sterna
cantiaca_, Gmel., heard calling for first time. Longstone L.H., May
3rd, first Sandwich Tern seen on island. Inner Farne L.H., May 2nd,
Arctic Tern, _Sterna macrura_, Naum., seen first time; 4th, both
together, flying round their breeding-stations. Inner Farne, Aug.
28th, most of Arctic and Sandwich Terns left their breeding-quarters.
Longstone and Inner Farne, Sept. 6th and 7th, both species finally left
island.

Larinæ, Gulls.--Heligoland, Jan. 17th, Greater Black-backed Gull,
_Larus marinus_, Linn., hundreds, all old birds; and on 31st, the same,
nearly without exception old birds; Kittiwake, _Rissa tridactyla_
(Linn.), same. Whitby, Feb. 12th, Herring Gulls came to the cliffs to
breed, in 1881; it was on the 14th. Longstone, March 15th, Gulls coming
to nesting-quarters. Whitby, July 16th, young first seen on wing; Sept.
7th, old and young left. Great Cotes, Sept. 28th, Humber-flats covered
with various Gulls. Whitby, Oct. 14th, large numbers seen at sea, going
S. Spurn, in December, Iceland Gull, _L. leucopterus_, Faber, mature
and immature, obtained.

Stercorariinæ, Skuas.--Farne Inner, Sept. 26th, Skuas seen in
attendance on Black-headed Gulls. Teesmouth (Redcar), Oct. 20th, five
Skuas to E. Nov. 1st, Longstone, one. Have been remarkably scarce on
the coast.

Procellariidæ, Petrels.--Coquet L.H., Oct. 14th, 7 p.m., one Stormy
Petrel caught against glass and set at liberty again. Languard, 11th,
one, 6.15 p.m. Spurn, 29th, one at edge of water.

Alcidæ, Auks.--Common Guillemot, _Lomvia troile_, (Linn.), Longstone
L.H., Jan. 3rd, 1883, Guillemots flying in from sea to island;
March 15th, 1882, assembling for breeding on islands; May 15th,
Puffins assembling on islands; Aug. 25th, Guillemots and Puffins
have left their nesting-quarters on rocks; Oct. 22nd, Little Auk,
_Mergulus alba_, Linn., one seen; Nov. 1st, two young Puffins seen.
Inner Farne, April 1st, multitudes of Guillemots flying up to their
nesting-quarters; Nov. 18th, several Puffins and Guillemots off
islands. Flamborough, Guillemots great many last week in January,
towards headland; Feb. 5th, great numbers going N. all morning; Dec.
27th, first seen off coast, are passing and repassing daily in great
numbers.

Colymbidæ, Divers.--Inner Farne, Sept. 6th, Great Northern Diver, _C.
glacialis_, Linn., three to N.; Dec, first week, Red-throated Diver,
_C. septentrionalis_, Linn., Black-throated Diver, _C. arcticus_,
Linn., and Great Northern Diver, all three about the islands this week;
on 5th, fourteen Great Northern Divers to W. Longstone, Nov. 14th, two
young Great Northern Divers off island fishing. Teesmouth, Oct. 31st,
flock of Great Northern Divers passed at noon.

Podicipitidæ, Grebes.--October, Sclavonian Grebe, _Podiceps auritus_,
Linn., adult in winter plumage shot in a timber pond at Hull;
Red-necked Grebe, _P. griseigena_ (Bodd.), and Sclavonian Grebe, on
Humber in October and November.

The Committee are indebted to Professor Chr. Fr. Lütken, of the
Universitetets Zoologiske Museum, Copenhagen, for a list of the
birds killed against the lantern of the lighthouse of Stevns, on the
projecting part of Zealand, marking the limit between the Baltic
and the Grönsund Belt, in the autumn of 1882. Professor Lütken, in
forwarding the list, remarked that his late lamented predecessor.
Professor Reinhardt, made arrangements with a physician, Mr. Antander,
residing at the small town of Storeheddinge, seven Danish miles south
of Copenhagen, in the neighbourhood of Stevns Klint and the lighthouse
of Stevns, for forwarding any birds found killed to the museum, with
the following result:--


Stevns Fyr, Zealand, Denmark, 1882.

  April 14th. _Turdus musicus_         2.
    "    "    _Saxicola œnanthe_       2 males.
    "   15th. _Sylvia rubecula_        1 male.
    "    "    _Emberiza miliaria_      1.
    "   19th. _Numenius arquatus_      1.*
    "    "    _Turdus musicus_         1.
    "    "    _Saxicola œnanthe_       3 males and 8 females.
    "    "    _Turdus iliacus_         1.
    "   24th. _Emberiza passerina_     1 caught alive.
    "   29th. _Turdus musicus_         1.
  May    9th. _Sylvia schœnobænus_     1.
    "   11th. _Luscinia philomela_     1 alive.†
    "    "    _Emberiza hortulana_     1   "   †
    "   12th. _Muscicapa atricapilla_  1.
    "   18th. _Sylvia cinerea_         2.
    "    "    _S. phragmitis_          1.
    "    "    _S. rufa_                1.
    "    "    _S. trochilus_           1.
  Sept. 21st. _Turdus torquatus_       1.
    "    "    _Sylvia rubecula_        5.
    "    "    _S. curruca_             1.
    "    "    _Ruticilla phœnicurus_   2.
  Oct.  10th. _Sylvia rubecula_        1.
    "   21st. _Turdus iliacus_         2.
    "    "    _Alauda arvensis_        4.
    "    "    _Regulus cristatus_      2.
    "    "    _Emberiza schœniclus_    1.

* Is often seen swarming around the lighthouse at the time of its
migration--six or seven on this night flew against the panes without
being killed, and two others were caught alive. About forty Redbreasts
and Wheatears were caught on the same night, but set at liberty again
in the morning. On clear moonlight nights nothing at all is caught or
found.

† According to Mr. Antander were not sent to museum.

Mr. Gätke sends the following notes of an extraordinary migration of
the Silver Gamma Moth, _Plusia gamma_, across Heligoland in August,
1882:--

On Aug. 13th, at 1 a.m. till 4, thousands on thousands passed the
Heligoland lighthouse, travelling E. to W. From 11 p.m. on the 15th,
till 3 a.m. on 16th, millions, like a snow-storm, all belonging to
the same species, passed forward in the same direction. Again, on the
18th, from 11 p.m. till 3 a.m. on the 19th, thousands on thousands
were observed under the same circumstances. Some scores caught for
identification were all in most perfect plumage; no fading or abrasion.


General Remarks.

The observations taken along the E. coast of England in the spring and
autumn of 1882 have been such as to confirm the conclusions arrived at
in previous reports.

As in 1880 and 1881, the line of autumn migration has been a broad
stream from E. to W., or from points S. of E. to N. of W., covering
the whole of the E. coast. In 1880 a considerable proportion of the
immigrants crossed at the more southern stations; in 1881 they covered
the whole of the E. coast in tolerably equal proportions; but in 1882
the stations N. of the Humber show a marked preponderance of arrivals.

Although migration has extended over an unusually long period,
commencing in July and continued with but slight intermission
throughout the autumn and into the following year to the end of
January, yet the great mass of immigrants arrived on our E. coast in
October, and a large proportion of these during the first fortnight
in the month. From Oct. 6th to 8th, inclusive, and again from the
12th to the 15th there was, night and day, an enormous rush, under
circumstances of wind and weather, which observation has shown are most
opposed to a favourable passage. During these periods birds arrived in
an exhausted condition, and we have reasons for supposing, from the
number reported as alighting on fishing-boats and vessels in the North
Sea, that the loss must have been very considerable; large flights
also are recorded as having appeared round the lanterns of lighthouses
and light-vessels during the night migration. From the 6th to the
9th, inclusive, strong E. winds blew over the North Sea, with fog and
drizzling rain, and from the night of the 12 to 17th very similar
weather prevailed. Mr. W. Littlewood, of the Galloper L.V., moored on
the bank of that name forty miles S.E. of Orfordness, reports that on
the night of Oct. 6th, Larks, Starlings, Mountain Sparrows, Titmice,
Common Wrens, Redbreasts, Chaffinches and Plover were picked up on the
deck, and that it is calculated five to six hundred struck the rigging
and fell overboard; a large proportion of these were Larks. Thousands
of birds were flying round the lantern from 11.30 p.m. to 4.45 a.m.,
their white breasts, as they dashed to and fro in the circle of light,
having the appearance of a heavy fall of snow. This was repeated on the
8th and 12th, and on the night of the 13th 160 were picked up on deck,
including Larks, Starlings, Thrushes and two Redbreasts; it was thought
one thousand struck and went overboard into the sea. It is only on dark
rainy nights, snow or fog, that these casualties occur; when the nights
are light, or any stars visible, the birds appear to give the lanterns
a wide berth.

Unquestionably the principal feature of the autumn migrations has been
the enormous arrival of the little Gold-crested Wren. The migrations
appear to have covered not only the E. coast of England, but to have
extended southward to the Channel Islands and northward to the Faroes
(see Report East Coast of Scotland, Harvie Brown). On the E. coast of
England they are recorded at no less than twenty-one stations, from
the Farne Islands to the Hanois L.H., Guernsey. The earliest notice
is Aug. 6th, the latest Nov. 5th, or ninety-two days; during the same
period enormous numbers crossed Heligoland, more especially in October,
and quite up to the end of the month. On the night from the 28th to
29th Mr. Gätke remarks, "We have had a perfect storm of Goldcrests,
poor little souls, perching on the ledges of the window-panes of the
lighthouse, preening their feathers in the glare of the lamps. On the
29th all the island swarmed with them, filling the gardens and over all
the cliff,--hundreds of thousands; by 9 a.m. most of them had passed on
again."

Not less remarkable was the great flight of the Common Jay past and
over that island early in October, on the 6th, 7th, and 8th; thousands
on thousands without interruption passing on overhead like Crows, N.
and S. of the island too, multitudes like a continual stream, all
going E. to W. in a strong south-easterly gale. It would have been an
interesting fact if we had been able to correlate this migration of
Jays with any visible arrival on our English coast, but in none of
our returns is any mention made of the Jay. Mr. Matthew Bailey, of
Flamborough, told me that on one evening early in October (the exact
date he was not able to give) he had observed at dusk large flights
of birds, about the size of Jackdaws, coming to land, and was struck
with the good headway they seemed to make against a strong wind. It
was too dark, however, to make out what they were. Subsequently I have
received numerous notices speaking of the extraordinary number of Jays
seen during the winter in our English woodlands. This seems especially
to have been the case south of a line drawn from Flamborough Head to
Portland Bill, in Dorset.[9]

[Footnote 9: Common Jay. Additions and unusual numbers observed at
Arden, on Loch Lomond side, subsequently reported by James Lumsden,
Esq., is the only report of Jays I have got in Scotland.--J. A. H. B.]

Extraordinary numbers of the Common Hedge Sparrow (_Accentor
modularis_)--"the dunnock" of the English schoolboy, the "blue Janet"
of Scotland--passed over Heligoland in October, more especially on
the 6th, 7th, and 8th; and it is curious that on the 8th of the same
month they swarmed in astonishing numbers, both at Spurn and in N.E.
Lincolnshire.

The Woodcock arrived on the east coast on the night of Oct. 12th, or
early morning of the 13th; wind E., strong, fog, and drizzling rain. On
the morning of the 13th they are recorded from nine stations, covering
250 miles of coast-line, from the Farne Islands to Orfordness.[10]
It is fair to suppose that this, the "great flight" of the season,
did not start from the same locality, but from various parts of the
opposite coast of Europe,--places widely apart. Both previous and
subsequent to their passage the weather had been much of the same
character over the North Sea. Why they should start simultaneously on
this special evening, and how they managed to "keep touch," to use
a military term, during a passage of several hundred miles across a
stormy sea, in fog and drizzling rain, so as to arrive about the same
time at their Tel-el-Kebir on our English sand-hills, is one of those
points in the phenomena of migration which will probably take some time
and more extended observations, especially on the opposite coast-line,
to clear up.

[Footnote 10: I Also "great flight" same time, Isle of May. East coast
of Scotland report.]

An interesting entry in one of the returned schedules, that from
the Inner Dowsing L.V., placed seventeen miles E. of Sutton, on the
Lincolnshire coast, is that of two Hawfinches, which came on board on
the evening of Oct. 20th, a strong S.S.W. wind blowing, and remaining
all night, left again at daybreak, their course being from S.E. to
N.W., the course followed by a large proportion of our immigrants.
As far as we are aware this is the first notice of Hawfinches having
been seen at sea. At Heligoland, Mr. Gätke says the species is a
well-known customer, never in any numbers, but every spring and fall
some, betraying itself forthwith by its peculiar call-note, so out of
all proportion with its colossal beak.

There are some birds occurring on our east coast year by year with
tolerable regularity, which, during the autumn of 1882, have been
remarkable for their scarcity. This has been the case with all the
large raptorial birds, and especially with the Short-eared Owl, and
Common Linnet and Twite. Their absence on migration has also been
remarked upon in Heligoland. The Short-eared Owl also appears to have
been specially scarce on the east coast of Scotland. (See East Coast of
Scotland Report.)

Our returns show very clearly that the spring lines of migration,
followed by birds leaving our shores, are identically the same as those
followed in the autumn, but of course in the reverse direction from W.
and N.W. to E. and S.E.

As this is the fourth report issued by the Committee, we may, perhaps,
with the mass of facts at our disposal, be expected to draw deductions,
which, if they do not explain, will serve at least to throw some light
on the causes influencing the migration of birds. We might reasonably
reply that the work undertaken by us was not to theorise, or attempt
explanations, but simply to collect facts and tabulate them. This we
have endeavoured to do in the shortest and simplest manner consistent
with accuracy of detail. There is, however, one circumstance which can
scarcely fail to present itself to those who have gone carefully into
the reports issued by the Committee, namely, the marvellous persistency
with which, year by year, birds follow the same lines of migration when
approaching or leaving our shores: the constancy of these periodical
phenomena is suggestive of some settled principle or law governing
the movement. It is clearly evident, from the facts already at our
disposal, that there are two distinct migrations going forward at the
same time; one, the ordinary flow in the spring and ebb in the autumn,
across the whole of the western Palæarctic regions, which of course
includes the British Isles, of a great migratory wave moving to and
from the nesting-quarters of the birds in the coldest part of their
range, N.E. in the spring and S.W. in the autumn. Quite independent
of this there is a continual stream of immigrants, week by week and
month by month, to the eastern shores of these islands, coming directly
across Europe from E. to W., or more commonly from points S. of E.
to others N. of W., and the reverse in the spring. These are mainly
composed of those common and well-known species which annually make
these islands their winter resort, and take the place of our summer
birds: they come in one broad stream, cutting the line of ordinary
migration at nearly right angles; one flank brushes the Orkneys and
Shetlands, pouring through the Pentland Firth, even touching the
distant Faroes; the southern wing crosses the Channel Islands, shaping
its course in a north-westerly direction to the English coast. In
our explanation of the causes which first induced, and perhaps still
influences, this E. to W. migration, we must probably go back a long
way in the history of the world, when the distribution of the land
and water of continental Europe was very different to what it now is;
when there was no North Sea, and the western coast-line of Europe was
represented by what is now known as the hundred-fathom line off' the
West of Ireland, a coast which on the one side touched Scandinavia, and
on the other was linked with the Spanish peninsula. Great as is now
the contrast between the winters of Central Russia and those of these
islands, the difference would then be much more marked,--arctic cold on
one hand, and semi-tropical warmth on the other.[11] It requires then
no stretch of imagination to believe that great flights of birds would
on the approach of winter be driven before the intense cold of Eastern
and Central Europe to seek refuge and find food in the warm regions
of the west, regions which then would feel the full effects of the
warm equatorial currents, and enjoy an almost perpetual summer. This
movement once begun would, by the very necessities of existence, and in
time by an hereditary instinct, be continued. Gradually the land now
occupied by the North Sea has been withdrawn from beneath the migrating
flocks; year after year the middle passage became wider and more
difficult; yet the habit once formed would be continued, and hereditary
instinct, or whatever other name we choose to give it, supply the rest.

[Footnote 11: There are ninety species of plants, all told, common
alike to Southwestern England and Ireland, and to the Pyrenean and
Italian region. They represent an old flora no longer adapted to the
country,--a flora of warmth and sunshine,--and now dying out under
the advance of hardier, more vigorous and congenial species. They
may be regarded as the last floral relics of the submerged land,
that semi-tropical western land whose plants and flowers are not of
Scandinavian origin, but derived from Southern Europe.]

Mr. Wallace has told us how, in the Eastern Archipelago, comparatively
narrow, and probably very ancient, straits of water divide and wholly
separate distinct races of birds; and we have instances of this in
Europe, where species, common on the opposite coast of the Continent,
rarely or never occur in the British Islands.

Small birds, like the Goldcrest, do not cross great breadths of water
from choice; they doubtless would prefer a migration over land, from
field to field, or hedge to hedge; or at the most closely following
some old established coast-line. Why, except on some such hypothesis as
stated, should they attempt the North Sea, not alone at the narrowest
part, the straits of Dover, or from Ostend to the coast of Kent,
but in the very widest parts also, from the Elbe to the Humber, or
Danish coast to the Pentland Firth and Scotch islands? What impels
our autumn visitants, the young weeks in advance of their parents, to
launch westward across what, for anything they can possibly know to the
contrary, may prove an Atlantic, an ocean without a further shore?

There are doubtless several causes, working separately or together,
which influence migration, and we must not look for an explanation
of the phenomena attending these great periodical movements to one
cause only, for by doing this we lose sight perhaps of other equally
powerful incentives. I have spoken in previous reports of the
probability of birds following ancient coast-lines once linking now
distant lands, impelled by what we call, for want of a better term,
hereditary instinct, that is, an instinct derived through ancestors.
It is, perhaps, an open question whether the young, which undoubtedly
arrive in the autumn weeks in advance of the great mass of old birds,
depend entirely on this, or whether they are in any way dependent on
guidance and direction. It is a curious fact, which we have frequently
remarked, that the very earliest of their kind are frequently a few old
birds,--flocks of young, too, often contain a sprinkling of old female
birds,--such as may be supposed have made the journey before; but it
must be also borne in mind that on dark or even starlight nights,
when these movements mostly take place, any guidance, even that of
call-note, would be futile at any but a very limited range.




WEST COAST OF SCOTLAND.


Schedules, &c., were sent to forty stations, the same number as in
previous years. We have received filled-in schedules from thirteen
stations.[12]

[Footnote 12: But the Isle of Man stations--five in number--have been
taken over by Mr. P. Kermode, as he is on the spot, and as they really
lie more into his district,]

Generally the returns are light, lighter than last year.

We have notes upon thirty-two species of land birds from this coast,
and about fourteen species of water-birds, whilst the species of Waders
or Littoral species may be placed at eight.

The Spring Migration I have kept distinct in this report. Weather notes
included in General Remarks.

Here follows the usual list of stations, with asterisks which point out
the annual returns from the beginning of the scheme, from each station.

West Coast of Scotland.

  Mainland.

  1879, '80, '81, '82.
    *    *    *        81. Cape Wrath, Sutherland   400 ft.
    *    *    *        82. Rhu Stoir, W. Cromarty   195 "

  Outer Hebrides.

    *    *    *    *   83. Butt of Lewis              170 "  Alex. Thompson
         *    *        84. Stornoway                   56 "
    *    *    *        85. Island Glass               130 "
    *    *    *    *   86. Monach Island            { 150 " } J. Youngclause.
                                                    {  62 " }
         *    *        87. Ushenish                   176 "
                       88. Barra Head                 683 "

  Mainland, Skye, and Inner Hebrides.

                       89. Rona, Sye                  222 "
         *    *     *  90. Kyleakin, Rosshire          53 " D. McCulloch.
         *    *        91. Isle Ornsay, Skye           58 ft.
    *    *             92. Ardnamurchan, Pt. Argyle   180 "
    *    *    *    *  {93. Hynish Signal Tower, Tyree{150 "   Alx. McEachern.
                      {94. Skerryvore, off Tyree     {
    *    *    *    *   95. Dhuheartach, S. of Ross
                             of Mull                  145 "  John Ewing.
    *    *    *    *   96. Sound of Mull               55 "  W. McLellan.
                       97. Corran Ferry, Loch Eil      38 "
         *    *    *   98. Lismore Island, Oban       103 "  A. Murray.
    *    *             99. Fladda, Easdale             42 "
    *    *    *       100. Rhuvaal, Islay             147 "
         *    *    *  101. Mac Arthur's Head          128 "  W. Maill.
    *    *    *    *  102. Skervuile, Jura             73 "  John Ewing.
    *    *    *    *  103. Rhinns of Islay            159 "  Andrew Lyall.
    *    *            104. Lochindaul                  50 "
                      105. Mull of Kintyre            297 "
                      106. Sanda, Kintyre Sound       165 "
                      107. Devaar, Kintyre            120 "
                      108. Pladda, Arran              130 "
              *       109. Lamlash, Arran              46 "
         *    *       110. Turnberry, Ayrshire         96 "
    *    *    *       111. Corsewall, Wigtown         112 "
    *    *    *    *  112. Loch Ryan, Wigtown          46 "  Ralph Ewing.
    *    *    *    *  113. Portpatrick, Wigtown        37 "  Jas. Beggs.
    *    *    *    *  114. Mull of Galloway, Wigtown  325 "  H. Morrison.
              *       115. Little Ross, Kirkcudbright 175 "
                      116. Point of Ayr             }
                      117. Douglas Head             }
                      118. Chickens Rock            } Isle of Man.
                      119.-1880. Bahama Rock L.V.   }
                      120. Longness L.V.            }

The last five stations are now placed at the head of the W. of England
stations under Mr. P. Kermode. We are sorry to find a falling off in
the returns this year and would have liked to know if any reason can be
assigned for the same.

We have to thank Mr. McCulloch, at Kyleakin, for the careful records of
directions of flight of the species observed. These are important, and
a great assistance at arriving at conclusions.

At Skervuile, owing to an accident to his hand, no notes were kept by
Mr. Ewing for some time between July and September, but fewer birds
were seen than for many years back.

Turdidæ.--In autumn, at Monach, Kyleakin, Skerryvore, Dhuheartach,
Rhinns of Islay, Corsewall, Loch Ryan, Mull of Galloway. No records
at any stations till Oct. 11th, when three Fieldfares were killed at
Monach. An indication of a rush was apparent all through October after
that date of _Turdidæ_ and other species, more especially at Rhinns of
Islay. Latest records on Nov. 22nd, prior to which date many Blackbirds
and Thrushes frequented Corsewall for a week during a covering of snow;
therefore probably only a local movement. At Kyleakin Song Thrushes and
Blackbirds resided all winter up to January, 1883. In October no great
rush observable, but indications of the same migration observable on
the E. coast were noticed at Corsewall on the 14th, and at Dhuheartach
and Rhinns of Islay on 17th; and a few Blackbirds and Thrushes showed
at Skerryvore on 13th. Eight Song Thrushes were killed one night
also at MacArthur's Head, and a single male Blackbird was seen in
the garden at Monach on Nov. 1st. A rush of "small birds" took place
during October, but in no large masses, at MacArthur's Head and Rhinns
of Islay, and at Corsewall and southward. Three species of _Turdidæ_
noticed.

Saxicolinæ.--Spring records, as usual, are scanty; some five records at
five stations, _viz._, Butt of Lewis, Skerryvore, Rhuvaal, MacArthur's
Head and Mull of Galloway. Earliest, March 9th at Butt of Lewis;
latest, on May 17th at MacArthur's Head, mostly of single Wheatears.
In autumn, a few records of Wheatears from Skerryvore, Dhuheartach,
Rhuvaal, and Rhinns of Islay: the earliest, Aug. 17th at Dhuheartach;
latest, Oct. 16th; and an evident rush on Aug. 23rd at Rhinns of Islay,
and again on Sept. 10th at Skerryvore, where over 100 were seen on the
rocks.

Silviinæ.--Of Robins one spring record at Skerryvore on April 9th, a
single bird resting; fair S.S.E. and haze. In autumn, at Kyleakin,
Skerryvore, Lismore, Skervuile and Little Ross. Earliest, a single
bird on Aug. 17th, at Skervuile; latest, two at Kyleakin (where,
however, Robins arrived on Nov. 15th, and remained all winter up to
close of schedule on Jan. 27th, 1883). An evident rush took place at
Butt of Lewis between Sept. 14th and 30th, with Wrens on the 26th, and
with Wagtails on the 28th, 29th, and 30th; in November, a few Robins,
accompanied by Wrens and Linnets, at Lismore on 11th; and in October
one Robin and one Wheatear, together, on 9th at Skerryvore. All the
records in August, September, and October accompanied by easterly
winds, the rush in September with N.E.

Phylloscopinæ.--Of Golden-crested Wrens one spring record at Mull of
Galloway, on March 8th and 9th, when "great numbers" were round the
lantern at midnight; wind S.W., light, clear. In autumn, earliest,
Sept. 21st, at Corsewall, and 22nd and 25th at Loch Ryan; latest, and
rush at Corsewall and Mull of Galloway, on 15th and 16th, when "great
numbers" round lantern; strong E. and haze; straggling birds also,
8th and 9th, at same places. A significant record is on Oct. 10th, at
Rhinns of Islay, north of which station we have no records. On that
date eight Golden-crested Wrens struck and one was killed; wind light
S.E., haze. The similarity of dates of occurrence at Mull of Galloway
on W. coast and Isle of May on E. coast this year worthy of notice (see
General Remarks).

Paridæ.--Of Titmice only two spring records, both at Mull of Galloway;
five killed at midnight, March 18th, and great numbers flying round
lantern on May 22nd; wind light E. Note approximation of dates on W.
and E. coasts (see General Remarks.)

Troglodytinæ.--Of Wrens one spring record at Skerryvore; two flying
about rock on May 24th; wind light N.W., clear. In autumn one on Sept.
22nd, at Lismore. Latest, Nov. 11th, a few at Lismore, and a partial
rush on Oct. 8th, 9th and 11th, at Corsewall, and on Oct. 11th and 26th
at Lismore, the two latter accompanied by Starlings and Robins.

Motacillidæ.--In autumn three Wagtails at Skerryvore, on Aug. 28th,
two--male and female--in a garden at Kyleakin, and a few on each day
at Lismore, on Oct. 28th, 29th, and 30th, with light N.E. winds. Of
Pipits, four struck and two were killed at Butt of Lewis, in strong
W. breeze, on March 17th; they were accompanied by Tree Sparrows. In
autumn, hundreds round the Little Ross on Sept. 6th, after 8 p.m.,
for two hours; one killed at 12 noon, in light N. breeze, clear,
at Dhuheartach, on Oct. 28th. It is not often they are recorded as
killed in the daytime in clear weather. _Land Notes._--An unusual
number of Pied Wagtails--fifty or more in one flock--on Sept. 25th, in
Kirkcudbright (J. J. Armistead, Esq.); also two Motacilla flava seen on
Sept. 11th,--a very rare occurrence at Douglas Hall.

Hirundinidæ.--Swallows: Spring records at Kyleakin, Skerryvore,
Dhuheartach, Lismore, Corsewall, and Loch Ryan. Seen first on April
12th at Corsewall, and April 15th at Loch Ryan, where fifteen Swallows
arrived with light N. wind and sleet. Latest records on June 15th at
Lismore, and 9th at Skerryvore; not seen at Dhuheartach till May 14th.
Other records at Lismore on 10th, a flock, and 13th, another flock. In
autumn, one Swallow rested on window of lighthouse at Dhuheartach, on
Aug. 11th, and a final movement was observed in September about the
14th and 15th, at Loch Ryan and Mull of Galloway, besides a few other
records at earlier dates. _Land Notes._--Swallow first seen at Douglas
Hall, Dumfriesshire on 7th. Mr. Howard Saunders, residing at St. Jean
de Luz, in the Basses Pyrénées, saw the first Swallow on March 25th,
along with many Wheatears and Redstarts. Woodcocks had passed but in
small numbers, and only two were seen in the market.

Fringillidæ.--Tree Sparrows seen at Butt of Lewis on Feb. 20th, when
four struck and two were killed; strong E. wind and haze. Again six
were seen at same place and two killed on March 20th; and again six
at the same place and one killed, on April 8th. House Sparrows are
recorded on May 27th, at Skerryvore, flying about; and at MacArthur's
Head--a number all day--on May 8th. House Sparrows were also seen at
Butt of Lewis on Feb. 25th, with strong S.W. breeze, haze, and rain.
In autumn, House Sparrows, a large flock at Lismore on Oct. 24th;
"Finches" on Oct. 10th, at Sound of Mull; Linnets, a rush about 7th
and 11th at Lismore, with a few earlier records; and on Dec. 29th, at
Monach, where all left on the 20th. Some of these records probably
apply to Grey Linnets, and the Monach one likely to Twites or "Mountain
Linnets." Four, possibly five, species. _Land Notes._--Four Siskins
seen on sand-hills on Solway Firth, on a patch of thistles; gone next
morning, Oct. 17th (J. J. Armistead.) Mr. Scot Skirving, of Edinburgh,
mentions, in lit., that the Chaffinch, was the most common of small
birds in Islay prior to the terrible winter of 1878, but after that
very rare indeed, until on Oct 22nd, 1880, a flock of some thousands
appeared, and since then they have again been fairly abundant.

Emberizidæ.--Two Snow Buntings were seen at Butt of Lewis on March
21st. Autumn records: Snow Bunting Oct. 15th at Kyleakin, to Dec. 12th
at Butt of Lewis. No rush apparent and records scanty; three or four
in all in October and November. One Yellow Bunting on Oct. 15th, at
Kyleakin. Two or three records at Dhuheartach also in October, November
and December.

Alaudidæ.--In end of migration of 1881-82, under date Jan. 12th,
16th, 1882, and 18th, large parties of Larks are recorded at Lismore;
wind light S. No more records till autumn, 1882. On Sept. 27th, at
Corsewall, one on lantern. Latest date, Dec. 27th, at Skerryvore, two
found dead; light S.S.W. and clear. Records of direction of flight
usually S.E., but these records are, as are too often the case, too
meagre to assist us. Direction of flight is earnestly asked for. A rush
distinguishable at Rhinns of Islay on Oct. 8th and 12th. Two Larks
remained all night on lantern at Dhuheartach, on Jan. 2nd, 1883.

Sturnidæ.--Starling: in spring a large flock on March 11th at Butt of
Lewis, but they are resident here, and rarely come to the light; two
were killed here, however, on June 7th. A record at Mac Arthur's Head;
great scarcity of records of Starlings. A few autumn records only;
numbers feeding for days at Rhinns of Islay, end of August. A rush
apparently took place at Mac Arthur's Head, along with many "small
birds," between first week of October and 31st. Records scattered
through November, December, and January (1883).

Corvidæ.--"Black Crows" (probably Rooks?) which are seldom seen at
Skerryvore, showed in March, when three were seen one day, and one
rested on May 29th, and a "Grey Crow" on 16th. In autumn, "Black
Crows," a large flock during snow, seen flying E. at Portpatrick on
Dec. 14th. One Hooded Crow on 26th at Monach, flying S.W. One Raven
at Kyleakin on 5th, flying S., light N.E. wind; and one Magpie ("very
rare" at Kyleakin) on Jan. 7th, 1883, flying S.E. One Jackdaw rested on
the rock on Feb. 11th (1883), and on the 19th two "Black Crows "were
seen flying in an easterly direction; wind S.W., fresh and clear.

Cuculidæ.--Records of arrivals of Cuckoos in spring are as follows:--

  Mull of Galloway  April 30th. Variable, light airs.
  Loch Ryan         May    5th. Strong N.W.
  Corsewall          "     5th. Strong N.W.
  Skervuile          "    19th. Light E., clear.
  MacArthur's Head   "    10th. Light E. airs.
  Lismore            "    15th. Light E. airs.
  Kyleakin           "     3rd.   ?      ?

_Land Notes._--

  Kinharvie, near Dumfries  May 3rd (_auct._ J. J. Armistead, Esq.).
  Douglas Hall              May 4th              "       "

If a series of records could be obtained like the above from the E.
coast stations, a comparison might be useful.

Strigidæ.--One record of Owl only. One "Owl" at Mull of Galloway;
strong E. breeze.

Falconidæ.--No actual migration of Hawks discernible from the records.
Visit Dhuheartach daily through the season, and seen at other stations
occasionally. One Falcon at Kyleakin seen flying S.; light E., rain
and sleet. Land Notes.--On Sept. 27th a Buzzard seen at Douglas Hall
(probably a migrant); and on Nov. 1st a pair of Buzzards seen (J. J.
Armistead, Esq.)

Pelecanidæ.--Movements of Gannets are noted at Lismore; two seen on
May 24th, and at Mull of Galloway on 21st--large flock flying west,
light E. breeze; and on 22nd about eighty also flying W., with strong
S. wind, clear. In July, great flights flying S. all day at Loch Ryan,
on the 8th, and two seen at Skervuile. Great flights in August at
Loch Ryan, flying N., wind N.N.W., strong; Sept. 29th and 30th, at
Skervuile, flying S. At Butt of Lewis, daily, from March 15th till
Sept. 15th. "Daily, all the year round," at Kyleakin. Solan Geese had
all disappeared from the vicinity of Dhuheartach by Nov. 14th, and they
reappeared there again on Jan. 25th (1883), and other records are up to
Feb. 6th (1883.)

Ardeidæ.--Only one record given at Portpatrick, Nov. 6th, N.W. gale,
flying N.; but there can be no doubt of the greater frequency of their
visits all through the season.

Anatidæ.--Wild Geese at Butt of Lewis, April 24th, when forty seen
flying S.W., and on 29th fourteen seen flying S.E.; wind on both days
fresh S. and rain. In August, at Monach, two flying N.W., strong N.
wind; on 30th and on 27th, two flying S., at Rhinns of Islay, light
E. In October, various flocks of sixteen, eighteen, twenty-four, &c.,
with general E. winds, coming and going in different directions at
Monach, mostly flying N.W., and at Kyleakin, but flying S.W. on Oct.
12th. Also in November, between 3rd and 6th, at Rhinns of Islay and
Loch Ryan, small parties flying S., with different winds A few records
in December also, at Monach. Records of Eider Ducks on Sept. 22nd and
27th, at Dhuheartach, males and females in equal proportions; eighteen
and twenty-four Eiders at Dhuheartach on Dec. 3rd and 10th, males
and females. A few "Pintail Ducks" (?) at Monach on Nov. 13th, and
one female shot. Swan: four at Corsewall, flying N.E., on Sept 27th,
fresh S.E. _Land Notes._--Black Scoters abundantly. Velvet Scoters
sparingly, but Scaup Ducks rarely seen on Solway Firth during June and
July. Common Scoter abundant in August; several Velvet Scoters seen.
Sept. 23rd, about fifty Wild Geese, finally flew away over sea to
S.S.E.; Oct. 1st, five Geese flew over Douglas Hall; 2nd, more seen;
twenty-four Geese seen on Oct, 14th (J. J. Armistead).

Rallidæ.--Corncrake at Rhinns of Islay, first seen on May 19th; at
Dhuheartach one seen on the rock on May 8th (never seen before here by
Mr. Ewing); and at Kyleakin one heard on May 31st. Directions of wind
not given.

Charadriadæ.--At Rhuvaal, three to four dozen young and old Golden
Plovers on Oct. 6th, and a few seen at Monach on Nov. 13th, and a good
many scattered over the islands at Monach on Dec. 14th. Lapwings are
also mentioned once or twice.

Scolopacidæ, Woodcock.--The rush barely indicated at Monach (odd bird)
Oct. 11th; Lismore (two killed), Oct. 8th; and one bird at Sound of
Mull, Nov. 5th. Snipe also very slight movement, principally at Rhinns
of Islay. Of Curlew, many records from Aug. 12th to Dec. 16th. Rush
appears, if any took place, to have been in September. Whimbrels are
reported "very scarce," only two records on July 21st, and on Aug.
15th, at Skerryvore. There are also a few spring records of Curlews,
from February to June. _Land Notes._--Aug. 8th, saw two Greenshanks
on Solway (J. J. Armistead, Esq.) It appears possible that this
bird breeds not far from the Solway, from other information I have
gained.--J. A. H. B. Four Turnstones seen Aug. 31st, Solway (_auct.
cit._); also two hundred Bar-tailed Godwits and thirty or forty Golden
Plovers. No Knots yet.

Laridæ.--Terns arrived at Rhinns of Islay on May 16th; at Dhuheartach
on May 12th; on Monach Islands, May 15th. They were last seen at
Skervuile on Sept. 6th. They leave Butt of Lewis about Aug. 12th.
They passed Lismore at night, striking lantern, on Aug. 13th, and on
14th more, accompanied by Larks. Of Gulls, "Boatswain Birds" were
seen on June 21st, at MacArthur's Head, and there are records of them
at Skervuile, along with Kittiwakes and Black-headed Gulls, from
May 1st to 9th. Two "Dirty Allans" amongst a large flock of Gulls,
at Butt of Lewis on July 10th; Iceland Gull, flying south, on Oct.
11th at Kyleakin; and great numbers of Kittiwakes at Skervuile, on
Oct. 3nd and 22nd. _Land Notes._--Common Terns at nesting haunts
in Kirkcudbrightshire, but no eggs laid by May 17th (_auct._ J. J.
Armistead, Esq.) By Aug. 12th Terns had left their nesting-ground
(_auct. cit._)

Colymbidæ.--Great Northern Diver seen at Kyleakin, near the lighthouse,
on May 10th, light E. wind; again on June 19th, light W. wind. In
autumn, at Monach, four seen, light S.E. wind, rain, and fog; two
flying S. at Corsewall on Nov. 21st, and two, resting, on 22nd; two
flying "towards N. Uist" (_i.e._ N.E.), at Monach, on Dec. 15th, and
one flying east at Corsewall on Dec. 16th.


General Remarks.

A vast migration took place this year upon our E. coast, the heaviest
waves breaking upon the entrance to the Firth of Forth, at the Isle of
May station, and again at Pentland Skerries. Bell Rock came in also
for a share, though apparently, from the schedules, a much smaller one
than at the Isle of May. The easterly winds prevailed all along our E.
coast, generally strong to gales, and the successions of south-easterly
and easterly gales in October, between the 8th and 23rd, occurring as
they did, just at the usual time of the principal migration, brought
vast numbers of land-birds to our shores. From Faroe in the north to
the extreme south of England this is found to have been the case, but
the usual blank on our Scottish coast occurs, over a large extent of
shore-line, from Dunnet Head, in Caithness, all the way to Bell Rock.
From all this great stretch of coast, embracing no less than ten
lighthouse stations, I have only two schedules returned. These two
schedules respectively are from Cromarty, a closely landlocked station,
and the other from Chanonry, a still more completely landlocked
station,--both absolutely sheltered, as it were, from the track of the
great S.E. and easterly gales; I may therefore say that I have not a
single statistic of direct value, between Dunnet Head and Bell Rock,
as regards the general migration. My thanks are none the less due,
however, to Mr. Ritson, of Cromarty, and to Mr. McGill, of Chanonry, as
their notes will, without doubt, prove of value if continued, and will
assist us in arriving at conclusions regarding more local movements of
birds, dependent upon food and shelter, which may prove none the less
interesting because of their connection with landlocked positions.
The absence of returns from this great stretch of coast-line is much
to be deplored, and at present I am perfectly unable to state whether
it is due entirely to absence of birds at all these stations every
season, which, however, I can hardly think is the case, or if it is
lack of interest at some of these stations. If the latter, we can only
say we regret that we have failed to arouse sufficient interest in
our subject. I cannot pass over this without the one further remark,
that if the lighthouse-keepers at these stations would only return the
schedules, with even a _negative_ statement, _every year_, it would
facilitate our work. _The absolute knowledge, that year after year no
birds are seen at these stations would be as valuable to us as positive
data._ By a chance visit to Buchan Ness--one of these stations--on the
Aberdeenshire coast, I learned that a Manx Shearwater was once captured
at the lights, and saw the specimen, and thus it was added to the
Aberdeenshire fauna, besides being an extremely rare visitant to any
portion of the E. coast. Had this been returned in a schedule, I would
have been doubly grateful for dates and circumstances of the occurrence
at the time. While I am on the subject of addressing our reporters _let
me once more earnestly request them, in every case where possible,
to state the directions in which migratory flocks of birds are seen
flying. This would greatly facilitate our deductions from year to year;
and especially would I ask attention to this at all the more northerly
stations, and all the west coast stations_.

Perhaps not the least remarkable migration was that of _Regulus
cristatus_ (the Golden-crested Wren), extending in one broad wave from
Faroe southward along the whole coast, coming with S. to S.E. to E.
winds, reaching the Scottish stations by Aug. 27th, and continuing to
November 12th, but apparently not reaching Faroe till Oct. 21st, when
a great rush took place. It is worthy of remark also that they were
unusually abundant at Isle of May in spring, a rush taking place in
March, and of females on March 10th. The stream in autumn, on the
Scotch coasts, lasted from 8th to 23rd, but did not begin in Faroe till
20th or 21st. A vast general rush of many other species reached our
coasts also between Oct. 8th and 23rd. The great waves of _Turdidæ_
scarcely seem to have reached Faroe, as we have only a few records of
them thence in December, and the same remark may be held to apply to
many other species mentioned.

It is also important to note, that while so abundant at the outlying
station of Isle of May and Bell Rock on the E. coast, there should have
been an almost complete absence of any of these species at the next
station, a little higher up the Firth of Forth, _viz._, at Inch Keith;
and to record that it appears to be always with westerly winds that
birds occur there. While there were hundreds of records at Isle of May,
there were none with the same winds at Inch Keith, and only about ten
records in all. Its somewhat landlocked position accounts for this, and
its being sheltered from the S.E. winds places it on a similar footing
with Chanonry and Cromarty, in the Moray Firth. Weather.--Upon our E.
coasts, easterly and south-easterly winds prevailed throughout the
greater part of the migratory seasons, both in spring and autumn, and
reached forces of from fresh to gales. On the W. coast the wind was for
the most part westerly and north westerly, rarely S. during spring, at
the greater part of the stations, and was easterly and south-easterly
in autumn, seldom reaching fresh or strong, or gales, as on the E.
coast, usually light, or from light E. or S.E. to variable. The above
facts will be considered, whilst we state next the distribution of the
migratory waves on the W. coast, in relation to those on the E. coast.
As in 1881, records on the W. coast begin to bulk more largely towards
the southern stations. All north of Rhinns of Islay and MacArthur's
Head the records of land-birds are very scanty, and the lighthouse
keepers remark upon the scarcity. At usually (normally) crowded
stations, such as Skervuile, they are reported as yielding "fewer birds
than for many years back." Even at Rhinns of Islay the records are not
large, but they begin to show an increase at this point. Unfortunately
I have no autumn returns between Rhinns of Islay and Corsewall, which
latter is south of the Firth of Clyde.

Now, if anything additional to the general bulk of the records is
required to show the line of migration of 1882, it is the significant
record of the Golden-crested Wren at Rhinns of Islay on Oct. 10th, and
at Corsewall and stations to the south, but nowhere to the north of the
former station. Now, it seems that the strong easterly to S.E. gales on
our E. coast, which brought over such streams (rather than rushes) of
birds,--such countless thousands,--did not carry them forward across
the breadth of Scotland to any appreciable extent, but that the birds,
tired and storm-tossed, rapidly sought rest and shelter on arrival; and
that we have only on the W. coast indications that such a great stream
broke upon the E. coast. These indications, however, are strong enough
to enable us to mark out, with some degree of certainty, the lines and
turning-points of the stream.

If we do this, by comparing the records of the various schedules, we
find that, south of the Firth of Clyde, the records bulk most largely;
and we also find that the dates agree with those of the E. coast.

MacArthur's Head and Rhinns of Islay appear to me, from the bulking
of records, similarity of dates, continuance of light E. winds, and
species occurring, to represent the turning-point of the autumn
migration from E. to W. Rhinns of Islay is a salient angle, catching
glimpses of passing birds from N.W. to S.E. Otherwise, if the strong
gales did not cause all birds to drop for shelter on Scotland, it
must have carried many far out over the Atlantic, as in 1880. Isle of
May sends in 19 schedules, and Pentland Skerries 8. Bell Rock sends
2--thickly filled--and North Ronaldshay 3, but bulking less than Bell
Rock. What has become of the many birds passing through the Pentland
Firth? We find little indication of them at the nine northerly W.
coast stations. Have many overshot the land and passed out over the
Atlantic?

Another point worth noting, is the occurrence of many birds in spring
at the same stations frequented by the species in autumn. Thus, at Mull
of Galloway on March 8th and 9th, with westerly winds. Goldcrests were
abundant, and at the same station on Oct. 15th and 16th, an autumn-rush
took place, with easterly and N.E. wind and haze. The same double
records occur at Bell Rock and Isle of May as regards many species, and
especially _Turdidæ_ and _Regulus cristatus_. This "returning" upon old
lines has already been remarked upon by my colleague, Mr. J. Cordeaux,
in our Third Report (p. 38). Since these last sentences were written,
I have received the first of the 1883 schedules from the Isle of May,
and may here state what the effects of the succession of N.E. gales in
March have been on the spring migration, leaving however the details
of Mr. Agnew's schedules to be worked into our next--1883--Report. I
give this in Mr. Agnew's own words, as I entirely coincide with the
opinions expressed. Mr. Agnew writes on the back of the schedule as
follows:--"With reference to your note on the schedules sent, as to the
effect of the N.E. gale of March 6th, 7th, and 8th, 1883, you will see
from the entries inside that the effect of that gale was almost to stop
migration at the Isle of May. Migration that had set in pretty briskly
on the 2nd almost ceased on the 5th, and from that date we had only a
few stragglers of the strongest wings, up to the 19th. I believe the
effect of that gale was to drive the birds that should have come this
way, away to the southward. Had the gale been from the S.E. it would
have been different here."

In fact, a N.E. wind reaching such strengths as those of March 1883
did, acts very much in the same way upon spring migrants, pressing them
more to the southward, as north-westerly strong winds and gales act
upon the autumn migrants, whose normal course is from E. to W., or S.
of E. to N. of W. It will be interesting to trace this further from the
schedules returned from other stations, when they come in for 1883.
Another point to note in spring migration of 1883, will be the greater
westering of the return migrants, if we may use the expression, partly
consequent upon the greater westering of the autumn migrants, caused
by the long-continued and strong south-easterly winds of the preceding
autumn, and partly upon the north-easterly winds of March pressing them
down and deflecting their course to more inland and sheltered lines.

In this connection I would speak here of the great assembly of the
Pied Wagtails on the narrow stone horizontal moulding above the upper
windows of the General Post Office, Edinburgh, where, upon March 17th,
1883, A. B. H., who recorded the facts in the 'Scotsman' of that
date, counted more than sixty; and he adds, in a subsequent letter
to me, "there was at least one in every niche of the carved capitols
of the columns. I think I am quite within the mark when I say there
were 150 birds altogether." This flock roosted there on March 17th
and 18th, but disappeared on the 19th, owing, Mr. H. thinks, to a
rise of temperature and the wind going round from N.E. to S.E. Mr. H.
was informed that numbers, probably the same birds, were seen feeding
at Duddingstone Loch on the 18th. Now, several years ago, a similar
assemblage was noted at the same locality, by a well-known Edinburgh
ornithologist, but it occurred, not in spring but in autumn, and a
general movement was at that time also noted by Mr. H., and recorded
in the Proc. Ryl. Phyl. Soc. of Edinburgh, on Jan. 15th, 1879, from
which last noted records of autumnal migration it would appear that he
saw about seventy Pied Wagtails on the roof a house in Edinburgh, in
the middle of September, 1878, and Mr. Scot Skirving, of Edinburgh,
on a previous occasion, saw some 300 at the General Post Office, but
the exact date of this latter record has unfortunately been lost or
mislaid, as we are unable, of course, to find out definitely the
meteorological phenomena accompanying the record.

Further, my friend Mr. Eagle Clarke, notes the arrival of the same
species in the neighbourhood of the Ure River, near Masham, Yorkshire,
as early as Feb. 5th, 1883. Though resident in the lowlands about
Leeds, it is migratory to and from the higher lands. Mr. Eagle Clarke
has often seen as many as 200 in a flock, on a large lawn near Leeds.

Mr. Agnew informs me, that with a S. wind there is little migration
past the Isle of May, and that S.E. is the best wind in spring to
permit of observations being made. Five Wagtails were seen at Isle of
May on the 29th and 30th, however, during a gale from the S.

The Spring Migration of 1883 seems to me to indicate the direct effects
of the N.E. gale, causing these Wagtails to keep inland by a more
sheltered route, which Wagtails in ordinary weather would probably
have passed up the coast-line and crossed the entrance of the Firth of
Forth, showing themselves at Isle of May and Bell Rock stations. Mr.
Robert Gray has, I believe, frequently observed the spring arrivals of
this species on the west coast--in Ayrshire; and it will be interesting
to see if we can trace the movement up the west coast, _on the
returning lines_, when schedules are returned for 1883, from Mull of
Galloway and other west coast stations.

I have dwelt upon these facts because I believe that our appreciation
of the general lines and of the laws regulating the great annual
migrations can be very greatly assisted by the study of individual
species on their migration, and good opportunities are in this report
afforded us of doing so by the records of several species. One more
remark:--It seems also worthy of note that very possibly these Wagtails
were finding their way _across_ Scotland from the Solway or the Clyde,
and, resting on the General Post Office buildings, repaired _south_
for daily food--as I have noticed birds do during the spring migration
on the Petchora, at Ust Zylma, and Habarika, in N. E. Russia; and
on the advent of a more favourable temperature and change of wind,
pursued their course northward. If these are correctly recorded as
Pied Wagtails,--as there is no reason to suppose is not so,--then
their destination would be the North of Scotland; but if they were the
White Wagtail or continental form, then, as far as general records
of migration guide us, they would probably _shoot off_ again at Isle
of May or Bell Rock--towards the Continent. Mr. Agnew's note of
"very white Wagtails" at Isle of May should be borne in mind in this
connection (_antea_, p. 12).

That a line of migration does occur across Scotland both in spring and
autumn between Forth and Clyde, I think, needs little demonstration
beyond what we have already stated in previous reports; both from data
and by referring to General Remarks this seems perfectly obvious. The
evidences of the sea having at one time advanced inland a long distance
past the very spot in which I now live can scarcely be gainsaid; and
Forth and Clyde--by two separate branches--must at one time have
approached one another very much more closely than they now do, and
a comparatively narrow isthmus have been formed by at least one of
these two branches. As already remarked, it is curious to find rare
American and rare eastern species occurring so frequently at localities
on that line; witness as the latest record of importance that of the
Pectoral Sandpiper, _Tringa maculata_, Vieillot, at Loch Lomond, after
continuous and scarcely failing easterly winds, on Nov. 24th, 1882.

Sir Geo. Leith Buchanan informs me that he believes that the wind was
north-west at the time he shot the Pectoral Sandpiper, but this was
local, as prevailing winds were easterly at that time. Sir George also
tells me of the other birds of rare occurrence which he has met with at
the same locality, but no notes at the time were taken of wind. These
are as follows:--

"Buonapartian Gull, in April 1851 or 1852. Black-tailed Godwit,
April, about same date. Shoveller found breeding, and two since shot
by keeper. Two Wood Sandpipers, one in August and the other on Oct.
4th. One Little Stint in October, seen in company with two others.
The Spotted Crake must breed, as every autumn I meet with them when
Snipe-shooting. The Shrike I obtained once in December, 1866, and I
saw another two or three winters since." I think if we thus endeavour
to group together rare occurrences, and collect lists from various
localities, we cannot fail to arrive at some conclusions regarding
the highways of migration. We are thus working from data up to facts,
without an undue amount of theorising.

It is well known to naturalists that Swallows cross the Alps by certain
passes, as is also done by other species, regularly year after year.
People have often marvelled at the punctuality of appearance of the
Swallow and other species at certain favourite resorts. There is
nothing marvellous in it. When the great general movement takes place,
and the flights of birds pass over old frequented and well-known
spots, these are recognised and promptly occupied by the hereditary
occupants, or, if found unoccupied by later migrants, they are then
filled up. This remark applies both in spring and autumn. In a former
Report I have instanced the arrivals of Wood Pigeons on the Fife coast,
and I have also instanced breeding-sites of birds occupied for many
years, unoccupied for two or more years, and then reoccupied again.
I am informed by Mr. A. B. Herbert that some of the favourite alpine
passes for the annual migration of birds are the Albula and Bermina
Passes into the Adda Valley and Lake Como, returning the same way in
spring. If this regularity occurs during the passage of the bulk of
migratory birds, I think there are good reasons for believing that a
similar regularity appears in the distribution along certain lines
of rare visitants, even if travelled all the way from America or the
Asiatic steppes and tundras. No doubt they get into the groove--so to
speak--and carry on in company with the main flocks of other species,
joining issue with them along the great highways of migration, which
I think have been well pointed out in many cases by Palmén and Herr
Weissmann. Though the article by the latter has been abundantly
criticised and even pooh-poohed, I venture to record my firm belief
that there is more in it than appeared on the surface, and that the
more we know of migration the more fully will his theory be borne out.

It is known to naturalists that some species which are known to breed
in the highest northern latitudes travel on migration to the furthest
southern localities. Let us instance the Knot (_Tringa canuta_).
Temperature has to do with this directly. What a vast breeding-ground
of this species, as yet undiscovered, must there be somewhere in the
far north if we witness the great streams on their annual migration
along our coasts. In spring they travel on and on towards the north
until they find a temperature cool enough for the successful hatching
and rearing of their young, reaching their far off summer quarters even
before insect-life has begun to show itself, after the long Arctic
winter; and, with the strength and vigour of a far northern-bred
species, they adapt themselves to the only food existing--the fronds
of lichen laid bare by the first melting of the snow. The hardiness
of the race, bred thus on the shores of the Arctic seas, induces the
vigour and "fitness" which enables them to travel so far again to the
southward in autumn and winter; and it is the annual overflow of their
vast numbers, pressing behind those in the van, which--as it were--adds
impulse to the ability, and carries them forward. They press forward in
autumn to fresh feeding-grounds as those behind are taken up by others
succeeding them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Report for the West Coast of England, although frequently applied
for by the Secretary, has up to this date not been received.

_August 26th, 1883._

       *       *       *       *       *




IRISH COAST.


In the spring of 1882 forty schedules were forwarded to the
light-keepers, and in the autumn forty-one. Thirty-one stations
returned answers in the spring, and thirty-two in the autumn.

The same stations were selected as in the autumn of 1881, with the
exception of Dursey Island, which was substituted for the Calf Rock;
and Dungarvan, which was added in the autumn of 1882.

Some improvement in filling the schedules is apparent. A few errors in
the identification of species probably have been made, but no blame is
attached to the light-keepers, who gratuitously observe for us to the
best of their ability.

In accordance with a desire expressed by the other members of the
Committee, and for the sake of uniformity, the observations have been
arranged under each species instead of under the day of the month,
and the light-stations are arranged geographically, beginning at the
Fastnet, in Cork, and going round by the east and north to the west
coast. The entries in the spring schedules are placed first under each
species.

The severe frost which visited these islands for about ten days,
beginning on December 6th, caused a local migration of many land-birds
to the sea-coast, and several entries occur in the schedules at this
time.

The weather observations taken by the light-keepers, when of an
ordinary character, have been sometimes omitted; but with scarcely an
exception every entry in the schedules, which refers to the occurrence
of a particular species on a given date, is recorded.

The name given by the light-keepers to the birds is always adopted, and
generally without comment; but occasionally inverted commas are used
when it appears advantageous to insert them.

Looking through the records, and comparing them with reports from
the English coast and elsewhere, it is evident that Ireland lies
comparatively out of the track of migrants, and its western stations
are especially poor.

The Tuskar Rock, on the Wexford coast, is certainly the best station.
Large numbers of migrants strike the lantern there, and many are
killed. Being the nearest land to the Welsh coast, and the extreme
south-eastern point of Ireland, the Tuskar is well situated for
observation.

A Snowy Owl was shot on the Island of Innishtrahull, off the coast
of Donegal, and forwarded by the light-keeper there to the Museum of
Science and Art, Keldare Street, Dublin.

Observations on Gulls and Gannets are numerous, and it is difficult
to estimate their value, as some light-keepers have given them much
attention, while others have scarcely noticed these species owing to
their frequent occurrence.

The presence of the Gannet all round the coast during the breeding
season would seem to show that a large proportion do not breed.
The little Skellig Rock, off the Kerry coast, is the only Irish
breeding-place of the Gannet; and when visited in 1880, by Mr.
Barrington, there were scarcely thirty pairs breeding.

In the returns many entries occur which probably do not refer to
migrating birds, but it has been thought prudent not to omit any from
the printed report.

It is remarked by some light-keepers that more birds strike fixed than
revolving or flash lights.

Attention is called to the great scarcity of Starlings in 1882 in
several schedules.

Conclusions are premature for a year or two, and it is as well to let
the observations of the light-keepers speak for themselves.

Great results are not anticipated from this enquiry, but few
satisfactory ones will be forthcoming unless it be continued; it is
therefore essential that the light-keepers should assist us for some
years longer, and we trust they will do so.

To Captain Boxer, R.N., Inspector of Irish Lights, we are again
indebted for friendly aid; as well as to the Commissioners of Irish
Lights, who were good enough to take forty copies of last year's
report, and distribute them to the various observers.

                            Alexander G. More.
                            Richard M. Barrington.


List of Light-stations.

                                            Miles
                                            from
                                    Sp. Au. shore.  Names of Observers.

   1. Fastnet, Co. Cork              o   o    8
   2. Galley Head, do.               x   x    -     John Whelan.
   3. Old Head, Kinsale, do.         x   x    -     George Dunleavy and
                                                      Martin Kennedy.
   4. Mine Head, Waterford           x   o    -     Joseph Hammond.
   5. Dungarvan, do.                 -   x    -     Wm. Higginbotham.
   5. Coningbeg Lt.-ship, Wexford    x   x   10     Patrick Cullen.
   6. Barrels Rock Lt.-ship, do.     o   x    4     Michael Doyle.
   7. Tuskar, do.                    x   x    7     Richard Hamilton.
   8. Arklow S. Lt.-ship, Wicklow    x   o    7     William O'Shea.
   9. Wicklow Head                   o   o    -
  10. Kish Bank Lt.-ship, Dublin     x   x    7     William Daly.
  11. Howth Baily, do.               o   x    -     William Dunne and
                                                      James Higginbotham.
  12. Rockabill, do.                 o   x    5     Joseph Hammond.
  13. Copeland Island, Down          x   x    3     John Walsh.
  14. Maidens, Antrim                x   x    5     Patrick Keenan.
  15. Rathlin, do.                   x   x    6     John A. Murray.
  16. Innishtrahull, Donegal         x   x    -     W. H. James.
  17. Dunree Head, do.               x   x    -     John Stapleton.
  18. Lough Swilly, do.              x   x    -     Henry Redmond.
  19. Tory Island, do.               o   x    9     Thomas Sweeny.
  20. Arranmore, do.                 x   x    5     Henry Williams.
  21. Rathlin O'Birne, do.           o   x    2     Joseph Hill.
  22. Killybegs, do.                 o   x    -     Daniel Hawkins.
  23. Oyster Island, N. Sligo        x   x    1     John Young.
  24. Broadhaven, Mayo               x   x    -     Joseph Williams and
                                                      Michael Duffy.
  25. Eagle Island, E., do.          x   o    2     Robert W. Redmond.
  26. Eagle Island, W., do.          x   x    2     Matthew Healy.
  27. Blackrock, do                  x   o    9     Martin Kennedy.
  28. Blacksod Point, do.            x   o    -     J. Williams.
  29. Clare Island, do.              x   x    4     J. Reilly and G. H.
                                                      Brownell.
  30. Slyne Head, N., Galway         x   x    3     John Gillan and Robert
                                                      Tyrrell.
  31. Slyne Head, S., do.            x   o    -     William Callaghan.
  32. Arran Island, N., do.          x   x    9     John Kelly.
  33. Straw Island, do.              x   x    9     Charles Boyle.
  34. Straw Island, S., do.          o   x    6     John O'Donnell.
  35. Loop Head, Clare               o   o    -
  36. Samphire Island, Kerry         x   x    ½     Michael O'Donnell and
                                                      J. Williams.
  37. Tearaght, do.                  x   x    9     Edward McCarron.
  38. Valentia, do.                  x   x    -     Thomas McKenna and
                                                      Joseph Williams.
  39. Skelligs, do.                  x   x    9     Henry Gardiner.
  40. Dursey Island, Cork            x   x    ½     James Keenan.

Abbreviations

  Sp. = Spring; Au. = Autumn; o = No reply; x = Schedule returned partly or
    wholly filled.


General Remarks of Light-Keepers.

_Galley Head._--"Spring: There is a total absence of land-birds at
this station. Autumn: Sea-birds passing are, I may say, the only birds
to be seen. The Curlew and 'Small Black Crow' are here all the year
round."--John Whelan.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--"Spring: No migration of birds observed this
spring."--George Dunleavy.

_Dungarvan._--"Autumn: With very rare exceptions no birds strike this
lantern."--William Higginbotham.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--"Autumn: Very few birds killed against lantern
since the light was changed from steady to flash light."--Patrick
Cullen.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--"Autumn: This is a very quick red
light, flashing 30"; no birds ever struck the lantern. I believe the
quick revolution frightens them away, as in fog and thick weather no
birds ever stay about the light like the ships that have the bright
light."--Michael Doyle.

_Tuskar Rock._--"Spring: Not many birds this spring: a good deal more
last year. Autumn: The 'Black Diver' leaves about May 1st, and returns
in October."--Richard Hamilton.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--"Autumn: Very few birds pass this station.
Birds seldom strike our lantern, as it is a revolving light. September
and October are the chief months for the migration of birds from the
Welsh coast."--William Daly.

_Howth Baily._--"Autumn: Sea Gulls and Cormorants all through the
winter. Puffins disappeared about middle of December."--William Dunne.

_Copeland Island._--"Autumn: Large numbers of birds resort to this
island and Mew Island during the winter months, and generally leave
early in March. The species seen daily are as follows:--Oystercatchers,
about 50; Wild Duck, 10 to 40; Sandpipers, 20; Cormorants, 8 to 10;
Starlings, 20 to 40; Blackbirds, 4 to 6; 'Grey' Plover, 2 to 20;
Curlew, 10 to 100 in each flock."--John Walsh.

_South Maidens._--"I saw no birds strike the lantern since I came to
this station."--Patrick Keenan.

_Rathlin._--"Spring: The Ducks are breeding on every little pond and
moss on the island; the 'Shell Duck' breeds here. Any amount of
sea-birds. Jan. 14th, 1883, the species of birds remaining on the
island at this date are:--'Large Gulls, Sparrows, Linnets, Stonechats,
Black Crows, White-backed Crows, Golden Plover, Green Plover, Bald
Coot, Curlew, Wild Duck, Snipe, Redshank or Sandpiper, Starling (they
have been scarce), Blackbirds, Thrushes, Cormorants, Water Wagtails,
one Snow Bunting (very few this season).'"--John A. Murray.

_Dunree Head._--"Autumn: Cormorants are here all the year round;
they build their nest under the lighthouse. They go up the Lough
every morning, and return in the evening. No birds strike this light.
Land-birds are very scarce."--John Stapleton.

_Lough Swilly._--"Autumn: Birds seldom strike this lantern. Barnacle
Duck and Widgeon frequent the head of Lough Swilly from about Oct. 1st
to end of March."--Henry Redmond.

_Arranmore._--"Spring: The birds that breed on this island are
'Stonechats,' 'Gulls,' 'Puffins,' 'Ravens,' 'Goldfinches,' 'Hawks,' and
'Red-legged Jackdaws' (Choughs). Autumn: This station seems out of the
line of passing birds."--Henry Williams.

_Killybegs._--"Autumn: The number of birds striking the lantern has
been very few since 1879; only the two named in the schedule (Woodcock)
have struck up to the present. The frost and snow of 1879 made great
havoc among Thrushes, Blackbirds, Starlings, and Fieldfares. I saw no
Starlings since 1881, which is very unusual. In the spring of 1882
I saw two very fine specimens of the Northern Diver; they remained
until late in summer. Puffins arrive in large numbers early in July,
and usually leave _en masse_ towards the middle of August. Cormorants
muster pretty strongly in the autumn months. Several Grey Gulls and
four or five Black-headed remained here during the present winter. I
observed one Gull a few days ago of a dirty white or creamy colour, no
feathers of any other colour being visible. The Sea Swallow, or 'Pirr
Gull,' used to visit us in thousands formerly; but since the autumn of
1878 not one has been seen here. When stationed at the mouth of the
Boyne, in 1876, a few of these birds used to breed there, laying their
eggs on the top of little sandy hillocks."--Daniel Hawkins.

_Oyster Island, North._--"Scarcely any land-birds visit this
island."--John Young.

_Broadhaven._--"Autumn: The Gannet does not breed on the Stags, but is
to be seen after herring."--Michael Duffy.

_Eagle Island, East._--"Spring: did not observe any birds of a
migratory kind pass this island."--Robert W. Redmond.

_Eagle Island, West._--"Autumn: I have carefully watched the movements
of birds, and have not found anything worth reporting. Sea-fowl
occasionally after herring in large groups; but they come and go no
particular way."--Matthew Healy.

_Clare Island._--"Autumn: Very few migratory birds at this station in
1882, with the exception of Gulls, Guillemots, Puffins, and Razorbills,
of which large numbers arrived in the latter part of March, and left on
Aug. 18th. Cormorants and Kittiwakes all the year round. Large numbers
of Grouse from August to January. Snipe and Woodcock, November to
March. Two large Eagles have their eyrie on the cliffs of a mountain
close to the lighthouse: they kill several lambs. Geese, Ducks, and
Hens, and carry them to the mountain with the greatest ease."--George
H. Brownell.

_Slyne Head, North._--"Autumn: Very few land-birds visit this
station."--Robert Tyrrell.

_Slyne Head, South._--"Spring: The Tern used to arrive for breeding
perhaps about May 4th or 6th; this year they did not come until June
4th, and not one bird hatched on the island this year. Sea-hawks arrive
the first week in April, and leave about the end of October. I have
not seen a Crow for two years, nor a Starling this year."--William
Callaghan.

_Arran Island, North._--"Autumn: No birds struck the lantern in 1882.
I have not observed any Blackbirds, Thrushes, or Starlings, during the
past year."--John Kelly.

_Straw Island._--"Autumn: All descriptions of birds were fewer this
year than usual."--Charles Boyle.

_Arran Island, South._--"Autumn: Only a few 'Stares' struck the lantern
this winter."--John O'Donnell.

Samphire Island.--"Spring: Not a single bird struck last winter, the
chief cause being that we have a red light all round east and south,
which birds never strike. Almost all birds strike with S.E. winds, and
generally on the east side of the lantern."--Michael O'Donnell.

_Tearaght Rock._--"Spring: The Sea-parrots are so plentiful here (April
25th) that on some occasions the whole island is completely covered
with them: they are just now beginning to find their way into their
holes. There is some solitary bird here, so it seems, makes a noise so
loud, or crows so loud, in the cliffs, that one can hear it distinctly
in the dwellings. It sounds something as follows: 'kuck, kuck, ko,
kuck, kuck, ko.' This is repeated a few times, and then there is an
interval of some minutes. So far I can neither see nor hear it in the
daytime. It is called in this place the 'Night-bird.' (See 'Zoologist,'
January, 1883). The Sea-parrot does not lay more than one egg unless it
is taken away, when another is laid at the end of a week, and if this
is taken away another egg is laid; then no more are laid that year. The
young remain in their holes until they are fully feathered. They leave
them in July, and are well guarded in the sea by the old birds. It is
my opinion they do not ascend on the island any more after they have
left their holes. The only way the young birds are distinguished from
the old ones the following spring is that their feet are still a little
black. The Razorbill begins to lay its egg about May 18th. The parent
birds relieve each other while hatching. I actually saw one Razorbill
come up to another which was on the egg, peck it, when off it went, and
the new comer at once took its place. The Stormy Petrels breed here,
but in small quantity. Autumn: Referring to the cry of the 'Night-bird'
(Manx Shearwater ), the letter 'a' should be added to the 'ko,' and it
would then read, 'kuck, kuck, ko-a.' The cry is as distinct as that
of the Cuckoo, and would be heard about the same distance. I never
remember to have seen a Crested Cormorant until I came here. Starlings
and Thrushes come off with easterly winds when there is frost or snow
on the mainland. About a dozen Grey Linnets remained here during
December; also a few Snow Buntings. There are a couple of hundred
Titlarks summer and winter; they do not migrate. The same might be said
of the Common Wren; about a dozen."--Edward McCarron.

_Valentia._--"Spring: No bird struck this lantern for five years.
This point is too far west, and is out of the track of migrating
birds."--Thomas McKenna.


Eagle.

_Skelligs._--April 4th, two Eagles flying about the island.


Hawk.

_Rathlin Island._--April 1st, five Hawks, stopping in vicinity. June
22nd, four seen.

_Innishtrahull._--March 5th, small Hawks.

_Slyne Head, South._--May 26th, two Hawks, noon to 4 p.m. "There are
many Sea Hawks about this island. They arrive the first week in April,
and leave about the end of October."

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 13th, two Hawks. Jan. 2nd, one.

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 10th, "two Game Hawks coursing a Pigeon;" 16th,
one Sparrow Hawk.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 16th, one Hawk; 19th, ditto.

_Arranmore._--Nov. 18th, one.

_Killybegs._--Nov. 26th, two remained about a week.

_Clare Island._--Nov. 23rd, two Kestrels.

_Tearaght._--Dec. 9th, "one Falcon." Jan. 8th, 1883, two Sparrow Hawks.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 14th, one Sparrow Hawk; 16th, one "Falcon Hawk;"
25th, two Sparrow Hawks. Jan. 4th, 1883, one.


Snowy Owl.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 19th, one shot (now in Museum of Science and
Art, Kildare Street, Dublin).


Thrush.

_Slyne Head, North._--April 17th., one Thrush killed, 2 a.m., striking
lantern; 29th, flocks of Thrushes pitched on this island. July 8th,
five Thrushes struck lantern, one killed.

_Skelligs._--Jan. 3rd, 1882, eight Thrushes perched on island.

_Galley Head._--Dec. 13th, Thrushes going south.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 6th, hundreds of "Mountain Thrush;" 8th,
some hundreds of Thrushes.

_Tuskar Rock._--Oct. 13th, Thrushes continually striking, ten killed,
and one "Mountain Thrush."

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 12th, 13th and 14th, Thrushes about
lantern.

_Howth Baily._--Oct. 14th, two killed. Dec. 9th, one seen; 11th, one;
12th to 18th, several about station, frost. Jan. 13th, 1883, Thrushes
about light.

_Rockabill._--Oct. 4th, Thrushes. Dec. 12th, ditto.

_Copeland Island._--Nov. 9th, two Thrushes killed. Dec. 18th, four
ditto.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 15th, Thrushes about lantern, one killed. Nov.
7th, Thrushes. Jan. 5th, 1883, ditto.

_Lough Swilly._--Dec. 14th, one.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 19th, one struck, not killed. Dec. 10th, one seen.

_Arranmore._--Oct. 22nd, one. Nov. 18th, one.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Dec. 13th, one Thrush.

_Killybegs._--Dec. 10th, about twenty came when the frost began.

_Clare Island._--Dec. 9th, several.

_Tearaght._--Dec. 14th, half a dozen Thrushes; 24th, a dozen.

_Valentia._--Oct. 8th, one killed against lantern.

_Skelligs._--Nov. 3rd, ten. During December a few were observed daily
on island; also on Jan. 8th, 1883.

_Dursey Island._--Oct. 21st, four Thrushes going E.


Fieldfare.

_Valentia._--Nov. 29th, two Fieldfares.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 11th, twelve.


Blackbird.

_Slyne Head, North._--March 20th, one Blackbird killed against lantern,
3 a.m.

_Skelligs._--Jan. 25th, four Blackbirds on island. April 3rd, three
ditto.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 8th, several Blackbirds.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Dec. 7th, four flying north.

_Tuskar Rock._--Oct. 7th, one; 13th, thirty struck, all killed. Nov.
14th, three ditto.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 14th, Blackbirds about lantern. Nov.
15th, hen Blackbird killed, "being the first bird I have seen killed by
our lantern for the last two years." Dec. 10th, two blackbirds.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 6th, fourteen in fields; 12th, one. Jan. 13th,
1883, five about light.

_Rockabill._--Oct. 4th and 12th, Blackbirds striking lantern. Dec.
12th, Blackbirds seen.

_Copeland Island._--Sept. 21st, three Blackbirds killed. Oct. 8th, one
ditto. Dec. 18th, one killed.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 10th to 15th, Blackbirds about lantern; 18th,
three struck, killed. Nov. 7th, Blackbirds, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Jan. 5th,
1883, three or four.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 19th, one female struck, not killed.

_Arranmore._--Oct. 21st, one. Nov. 13th, one.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Oct. 19th, one struck, killed, 2 a.m. Nov. 13th,
one. Dec. 1st, one.

_Killybegs._--Dec. 10th, about twenty came on the appearance of frost.

_Clare Island._--Dec. 9th, several.

_Slyne Head, North._--Sept. 9th, two. Oct. 11th, two. Dec. 15th, two.

_Straw Island._--Nov. 13th, a flock of Blackbirds, 2 a.m., a few
struck, but none killed; fog and rain.

_Valentia._--Oct. 2nd, one killed against lantern.

_Skelligs._--Nov. 15th and 22nd, and at intervals during December, a
few were seen on island.


Robin.

_Eagle Island, West._--March 2nd, caught a Robin in an out-house, wind
N., moderate.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 20th, four about station.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 29th, one, 8 a.m., wind S.S.E.

_Lough Swilly._--Dec. 1st, one; 2nd, one; 6th, one.


Stonechat.

_Arranmore._--April 7th, eight "Stonechats" arrived.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 23rd, four "Stonechats;" seen also April 4th
and 8th. May 8th, they rested on the island.

_Eagle Island, West._--April, "Stonechats" arrived, about eighteen.

_Galley Head._--Oct. 30th, the "Stonechick" has left.

_Eagle Island, West._--Nov., saw a few "Stonechats."

[Some of the above entries may refer to the Wheatear.]


Golden-crested Wren.

_Slyne Head, North._--May 11th, one Golden-crested Wren killed.

_Tuskar Rock._--July 27th, two Golden Wrens; also on Aug. 6th and 9th.
Oct. 12th, twelve, one killed; 13th, continually striking all night.

_Howth Baily._--Oct. 9th, five Golden Wrens struck lantern; 12th, two
ditto. Dec. 17th, six.

_Rathlin Island._--Aug. 26th, one. Oct. 9th, two (one killed); 13th,
five struck (two killed). Nov. 30th, four seen.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 15th, Golden Wrens about lantern.

_Arran Island, South._--Oct. 14th, fourteen struck lantern; none killed.


Wren.

_Arklow Bank, South._--April 15th, six Wrens going N.W., wind light
N.E., cloudy; 18th, one Wren on deck, 5 a.m.

_Skelligs._--Feb. 22nd, two Wrens on island. April 9th, two Wrens on
island.

_Tuskar Rock._--July 27th, four "Common Wrens." Seen also Aug. 5th,
9th, and 31st; and Oct. 8th and 9th.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 10th, six flying south; 16th, three.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 15th, "Brown Wrens" about lantern. Nov. 7th,
ditto seen.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 6th, two Wrens caught on lantern.

_Arranmore._--Oct. 22nd, one seen.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Oct. 28th, one seen.

_Eagle Island, West._--Nov., saw two pairs of Wrens.

_Slyne Head, North._--Sept. 9th, two Wrens seen.

_Arran Island, North._--Aug. 7th, "three Common Wrens" going S.E. Dec.
9th, two.

_Skelligs._--Oct. 19th, two. Dec. 5th, four; 13th, two; Jan. 5th, 1883,
two. All alighted on island.


Tits.

_Tuskar Rock._--March 18th, 10 p.m. to 5 a.m., continually striking,
seventeen killed; wind fresh S.W., fog. April 21st, 10.30 p.m. to 4
a.m., constantly striking, twelve killed; wind fresh S.E., fog. July
27th, Titmice continually striking, wind fresh S.; also on 6th, 9th,
and 31st Aug.

_Copeland Island._--Sept. 10th, six Titmice killed; 21st, two ditto.
Oct. 8th, four ditto.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 14th, Titmice at lantern; 15th, one killed.


Wagtail.

_Galley Head._--Oct. 30th, the Wagtail has left. Rathlin Island.--Aug.
26th, three remained on island. Nov. 9th, one seen.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 19th, one.

_Lough Swilly._--Dec. 14th, two.

_Samphire Island._--Oct. 27th, five Wagtails on rock.


Larks.

_Arklow Bank_, South,--Noticed on April 5th, 7th, and 15th.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 8th, 10th, 11th, and 12th, Sky Larks seen,
one to five in number; they rested on the island. Observed earlier this
year than last year. March 22nd, Titlarks mating; they rested on the
island.

_Eagle Island, West._--April, about eighteen Titlarks arrived.

_Slyne Head, North._--April 29th, flocks of Larks pitched on island.
July 13th, one Lark killed against lantern.

_Straw Island._--From April 3rd to May 20th, continuous flocks of
Common Field Larks passing towards the mainland, generally about 3 p.m.

_Valentia._--April 3rd, small flocks of Larks and frequently to end of
month. May 3rd and 16th, a few Larks.

_Galley Head._--Dec. 13th, Larks going south.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 8th, Larks.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Dec. 13th, one killed against lantern.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Dec. 7th, one rested on ship.

_Tuskar Rock._--Oct 9th, Larks and Titlarks; also on Oct. 14th.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Nov. 30th, large flocks of Sky Larks.

_Howth Baily._--Nov. 20th, about two hundred Larks. Dec. 7th, twenty;
11th, ten; 12th to 18th, several, frost. Jan. 15th, 1883, Titlarks
about.

_Copeland Island._--Sept. 10th, ten Larks killed; 21st, four ditto.
Oct. 8th, seven ditto. Nov. 9th, eight ditto. Dec. 18th, two ditto.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 14th, Titlarks at lantern; 15th, Larks, one
killed. Nov. 19th, Titlarks. Dec. 15th, flock of fifty.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 14th, one "female" Lark killed.

_Eagle Island, West._--Sept., Sky Larks and Titlarks seem to be
departing.

_Clare Island._--Jan. 1st, 1883, twenty Titlarks.

_Arran Island, North._--Nov. 12th, eleven. Dec. 9th, six. Jan. 4th,
1883, two.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 14th, small flocks of Sky Larks; 15th, one struck,
not killed, Dec. 5th and 15th, large flocks.


Snow Bunting.

_Arranmore._--April 5th, four Snow Buntings left island.

_Galley Head._--Nov. 30th, two "Snow Birds" passed north.

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 5th, seven Snow Buntings arrived and will
remain some time; 31st, thirty.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 7th, Snow Buntings; 19th to end of month,
frequented island. Dec. 23rd and 24th, fifty to one hundred in a flock;
wind, strong N.W. Jan. 3rd, 1883, Snow Buntings daily to 18th on island.

_Tory Island._--Nov. 9th, one flock. Jan. 6th and 7th, 1883, Snow
Buntings.

_Arranmore._--Oct. 4th, one seen. Nov. 4th, 18th; Dec. 4th, 5th, 12th;
Jan. 4th and 6th, 1883;--on all these dates some seen.


Chaffinch.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 25th, flock of Chaffinches going W.;
30th, four Chaffinches.

_Arranmore._--Oct. 26th, four Chaffinches. Jan. 4th, 1883, one.


Sparrow.

_Rathlin Island._--June 9th, fifteen or sixteen Sparrows; remained two
or three days. Dec. 16th, Sparrows.


"Goldfinch."

_Arranmore._--May 4th, six Goldfinches "come to build." Valentia.--Oct.
6th, four Goldfinches. Nov. 8th, five. Dec. 18th, eighteen.

[The Goldfinch is now rare and local in Ireland; hence inverted commas.]


Linnet.

_Galley Head._--March 4th, one hundred or more going N. May 21st,
flocks of small birds, "taken to be Linnets," going N.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--March 9th, two Linnets flying westward.

_Tuskar Rock._--March 18th, 10 p.m. to 5 a.m., continually striking,
seven killed; wind fresh S.W., fog. April 21st, 10.30 p.m. to 4 a.m.,
continually striking, five killed; wind fresh S.E., fog.

_Clare Island._--Flocks of "Grey Linnets" noticed on March 6th, 10th,
28th; April 11th, 27th; May 3rd, 30th; and June 20th. The flocks were
continuous on March 28th and April 11th.

_Slyne Head, North._--April 29th, flocks of Linnets pitched on island.

_Galley Head._--Dec. 13th, Linnets going south.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 8th, Linnets and Finches.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Nov. 8th, six Linnets flying N.W.; 15th, seven
Linnets. Dec. 7th, three Linnets alighted on ship; 19th, one ditto.

_Tuskar Rock._--July 27th, Green Linnets striking; also on Aug. 6th and
9th; Oct. 9th and 13th.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 21st, about "thirty Chaffinches or
Linnets."

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 6th, about sixty; 7th, eight; 12th to 18th,
several; frost.

_Rockabill._--Oct. 12th, Linnets. Dec. 20th, Green Linnets all day.

_Rathlin Island._--Aug. 7th, flocks; 19th, ditto. Sept. 12th,
twenty-eight Green Linnets. Oct. 1st, thirty Grey Linnets; 18th, Grey
Linnets. Seen also on Nov. 1st and 3rd; and on 14th several flocks
arrived and apparently remained on island some time. During December
several flocks seen at intervals. Jan. 3rd, 1883, one flock.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 10th to 13th, flocks of Grey Linnets all day;
six or eight struck lantern, none killed; 15th, flocks. Dec. 31st,
Green and Grey Linnets; flocks of 100 to 150.

_Lough Swilly._--Oct. 12th, Linnets. Dec. 24th, flocks of Linnets.

_Arranmore._--Oct. 24th, forty Grey Linnets.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Oct. 28th, ten Grey Linnets.

_Killybegs._--Oct. 26th, twenty-five to thirty Grey Linnets; left same
day, going south. "They were accompanied by several small birds of
different species."

_Broadhaven._--Dec. 2nd, twenty-five Linnets. Jan. 7th, 1883, seven.

_Slyne Head, North._--Sept. 28th, twelve Linnets. Oct. 27th, three.

_Arran Island, North._--Aug. 5th, large flock. Nov. 12th, thirty to
forty.

_Straw Island._--Sept. 13th, thirty Linnets. Remained ten days on
island.

_Valentia._--Oct. 6th, ten. Nov. 4th, two; 20th, ten. Dec. 6th to 20th,
eight to twenty at intervals.

_Skelligs._--Oct. 12th, twelve "Buntings" perched on island.


"Bullfinch."

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 9th, one Bullfinch; 10th, three Bullfinches;
wind strong S.W.

_Tuskar Rock._--July 27th, Aug. 5th, 9th, and 31st, Sept. 6th, Oct.
13th, Bullfinches constantly striking. "This is a bird like the Green
Linnet, but more white on the outside of the wing." (Chaffinch?).


Starling.

_South Maidens Light._--May 11th, two dozen Starlings, 11 am., misty
fog.

_Rathlin Island._--April 15th, seven remained all day; 27th, they are
building here. June 10th, Starlings left.

_Galley Head._--Sept. 18th, forty to fifty Starlings going N. Oct. 9th,
continuous flocks passing N.; 20th, flocks of 100 to 300, remaining in
locality. Dec. 13th, Starlings going S.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Nov. 2nd, 300 Starlings; 4th, 400 or 500. Dec.
8th, hundreds.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Nov. 12th, fifty flying N.; 15th, eight flying
N.E. Dec. 9th, flocks going N.; 12th, one caught on board.

_Tuskar Rock._--Aug. 31st, Starlings striking. Oct. 8th and 13th, Nov.
14th, ditto.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, Starlings about
lantern; 27th, two. Nov. 6th and 11th, flocks going W. Dec. 11th, two.

_Howth Baily._--Nov. 7th, large flock; 14th, ditto. Dec. 4th, fifty;
12th to 18th, several; frost.

_Rockabill._--Dec. 12th, Starlings.

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 6th, three. Dec. 16th, flocks.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 7th, a flock of eight or nine.

_Oyster Island, North._--Dec. 4th, large flock passing S.W.

_Clare Island._--Dec. 6th, two flocks.

_Slyne Head, North._--Aug. 30th, two Starlings. Dec. 24th, three; 27th,
forty.

_Straw Island._--Nov. 10th, 120. Dec. 7th, forty. Jan. 11th, 1883,
forty.

_Arran Island, South._--Oct. 18th, thirty "Stares."

_Tearaght._--Dec. 15th, about 150 Starlings; 21st, 100.

_Skelligs._--Dec. 5th, twenty came to island; 12th, forty.

_Dursey Island._--Oct. 16th, forty; 20th, large flock going S.E. Nov.
14th, twenty going E. Dec. 10th and 13th, large flocks going S.E.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 11th, small flocks; 17th, 21st, some seen; 25th, one
killed against lantern.


Chough.

_Rathlin Island._--June 5th, Red-legged Crows. "They make their home
here."

_Blacksod._--April 27th, about eight Choughs. Seldom seen at this
station. June 17th, four to six Choughs going S.


Raven.

_Black Rock, Mayo._--May 23rd, thirty-six "Ravens," 7 a.m.; wind light
W. "It is remarkable to see so many of these birds together, as there
is seldom more than three or four."

_Slyne Head, South._--June 22nd, two Ravens.

_Arran Island, North._--Aug. 5th, two Ravens.


Hooded Crow.

_Rathlin Island._--April 13th, six White-backed Crows. "They never
leave."

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 23rd, four "Saddle-backed Crows." Two of
these Crows remained and nested in cliff.

_Broadhaven._--April 20th, two "Scar Crows" going S.W.

_Clare Island._--April 20th, flocks of Grey Crow. May 5th, ditto, going
S.

_Slyne Head, North._--March 3rd, seven Grey Crows; 6th, eleven ditto.

_Dursey Island._--April 9th, six Grey Crows going S.E. June 4th, 12th,
Grey Crows going N.E.

_Gaily Head._--Dec. 30th, the Grey-backed Crow has disappeared.

_Howth Baily._--Jan. 6th, 1883, flock of forty flying E.

_Rathlin Island._--Sept. 16th, "five Grey-backed Crows or Choughs"
(Jackdaws?). They breed on the island. Dec. 12th, two "White-backed."

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 6th, ten Grey Crows at all hours. They breed on
island.

_Lough Swilly._--Dec. 5th, one Grey-backed Crow; 24th, two.

_Arran Island, North._--Aug. 5th, four.

_Straw Island._--Nov. 30th, four. Dec. 15th, five.

_Valentia._--Nov. 12th, four. Dec. 8th, twenty.

_Dursey Island._--Aug. 22nd and 25th, eight; one or two seen also on
Oct. 9th, Nov. 11th, and Dec. 24th.

_Dungarvan._--Dec. 5th, two.


Rooks.

_Tuskar Rock._--April 6th, one flock, 7 a.m., going W., wind light
E.N.E.; 21st, one flock going W.

_Arklow Bank, South._--April 11th, one "Crow" going N.W.

_Rathlin Island._--April 14th, thirty "Black Crows," coming from
Scotland, wind strong N.E.; 23rd, forty Black Crows, coming from
Scotland, wind light N.W., foggy. May 5th, fifteen Black Crows. June
23rd and 30th, several.

_Lough Swilly._--June 4th, flights of Rooks. July 1st and 15th, great
numbers of Books; 31st, a few.

_Blacksod._--April 13th, large flock of Crows (Books) all day
constantly passing. May 22nd, Books.

_Clare Island._--March 20th, two large flocks of Black Crows going N.

_Slyne Head, North._--April 26th, flock of Books coming from the N.E.
June 12th, one flock of Crows (Rooks?). July 21st, flocks of Books
flying in different directions.

_Straw Island._--May 11th, 100 Crows (Rooks?).

_Valentia._--April 21st, a few Crows; also on May 21st.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--April 17th, one Crow going N.W.; 24th, one
alighted on ship.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 14th, three; 15th, six; 24th, sixty flying W.

_Rockabill._--Dec. 12th, Black Crows alighted on the rocks.

_Rathlin Island._--Aug. 13th, thirty. Sept. 10th, ditto. Oct. 6th,
forty; 19th, forty. Nov. 13th, thirteen. In all these cases going S. A
few seen on Dec. 11th, 12th, and 22nd.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 7th, eight "Black Crows." Dec. 10th, one.

_Tory Island._--Nov. 29th, eight Crows.

_Oyster Island, North._--Oct. 12th, twenty Rooks going inland.

_Clare Island._--Jan. 4th, 1883, six.

_Slyne Head, North._--Oct. 27th, four. Dec. 27th, ten.

_Samphire Island._--Oct. 4th, about forty; Oct. 12th, a very large
flock passing to opposite shore. They return about sunset.

_Valentia._--Oct. 8th, four; 24th, five.

_Skelligs._--Dec. 13th, twenty going E.


Jackdaw.

_Tearaght._--Dec. 10th, two; 17th, one.


Magpie.

_Lough Swilly._--Oct. 5th, one Magpie, 11 a.m.

_Arran Island, North._--Aug. 10th, two.


Swallow.

_Galley Head._--May 12th, from thirty to fifty Swallows going N.W.

_Mine Head._--April 21st, twelve Swallows, noon, wind S.S.E., strong,
cloudy; the first arrivals.

_Tuskar Rock._--April 24th, one, 8.20 a.m., going W.

_Arklow Bank, South._--April 5th, two going N.W.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--April 18th, two going S.E.

_Dunree Head._--June 15th, flock of Swallows.

_Lough Swilly._--May 4th, a few; the first this season.

_Arranmore._--May 6th, four came to build.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--May 4th, twelve Swallows "of the Martin species";
16th, six or seven Swallows.

_Blacksod._--June 10th, ten to twenty Swallows; the first seen.

_Slyne Head, North._--May 17th, nine.

_Slyne Head, South._--June 7th, four.

_Skelligs._--June 2nd, two flying about island.

_Tuskar Rock._--Oct. 4th, two flying about; also on Oct. 14th.

_Innishtrahull._--Aug. 12th, one "Black Swallow" (Swift?), last seen
for season.


Martin.

_Mine Head._--July 4th, six Martins.

_Oyster Island, North._--May 3rd, about fifteen Martins. They breed in
the neighbourhood.


Cuckoo.

_Mine Head._--May 1st, Cuckoo first heard.

_Rathlin Island._--May 10th, five Cuckoos.

_Arranmore._--May 3rd, two Cuckoos arrived.

_Oyster Island, North._--May 8th, heard first Cuckoo.


"Kingfisher."

_Black Rock, Mayo._--April 20th to May 1st, one or two "Kingfishers" at
sunrise. "When started they make in the direction of the Bangor River
between Belmullet and Ballina."


Pigeons.

_Rathlin Island._--June 10th, seven Rock Pigeons.

_Lough Swilly._--April 6th, some Pigeons.

_Blacksod._--April 8th, sixteen. May 19th, Pigeons 8 a.m. till sunset.

_Clare Island._--April 7th, four small flocks going S.E.; 11th,
continuous flocks going S.; 20th, ditto. May 10th, three small flocks
going N.W.; 20th, two flocks going W. June 6th and 17th, three flocks.

_Dursey Island._--April 14th, fourteen Wild Pigeons going N.E. May
15th, twenty Wild Pigeons going N.E.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 14th, nine flying S.

_Rockabill._--Dec. 13th, nine flying S.

_Rathlin Island._--Dec. 13th, flocks of Pigeons.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 10th, flock of eight Pigeons. They breed on
island.

_Lough Swilly._--Oct. 5th, Pigeons in flocks; 9th, 12th, 28th, ditto.

_Clare Island._--Nov. 5th, large flock. Dec. 22nd, ditto.

_Arran Island, North._--Aug. 3rd, four going S.

_Arran Island, South._--Nov. 17th, four. Dec. 6th, thirty.

_Dungarvan._--Dec. 29th, ten "Woodguests" flying about. Jan. 15th,
1883, six flying inland.


Quail.

_Innishtrahull._--Sept. 11th, one caught.


Golden and "Grey" Plover.

_Copeland Island._--April 20th to 26th, some flocks seen on island;
twelve killed against lantern.

_South Maidens._--April 10th, three dozen "Plover," 4.30 p.m.

_Innishtrahull._--Seen all the month of February during several days,
and on May 8th.

_Black Rock, Mayo._--From March 1st to May 20th, Golden Plover. These
birds never rest here, except when migrating.

_Slyne Head, North._--April 14th, three Plover (? Golden); one struck
the lantern, 2 a.m.

_Galley Head._--Dec. 10th, continuous flocks of "Grey and Golden"
Plover, from 50 to 100 in a flock, passing to the south; frost.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 7th, some hundreds of Golden Plover; 8th,
hundreds of Plover; 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, and 16th, ditto, going
south.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Dec. 10th, about sixty Plover flying S.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Dec. 11th, two flocks going S.W.

_Copeland Island._--Nov. 9th, some flocks of Grey Plover on island off
and on during the month.

_South Maidens._--Aug. 11th, a flock of Plover.

_Rathlin Island._--Oct. 22nd, sixteen "Grey" Plover remain here. Nov.
7th, twenty; 19th, forty coming from N. Dec. 13th and 16th, flocks of
Golden Plover.

_Tory Island._--Dec. 10th, "Grey" Plover; 11th, four Golden Plover;
15th, nine "Grey" Plover.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Oct. 4th, forty Golden Plover. Dec. 14th, thirty.

_Killybegs._--Sept. 23rd, about forty "Grey Plover" remained several
days. Oct. 8th, fourteen. Dec. 10th, about 100. These remained while
the frost continued, when they flew inland.

_Broadhaven._--Dec. 2nd, twelve Plover.

_Valentia._--Dec. 8th, fifty Golden Plover; 19th, twenty remained.

_Dursey Island._--Dec. 8th, forty going S.W.; 9th, large flocks of Grey
and Golden Plover all day going S.W.; 12th, ten.

_Dungarvan._--Dec. 15th, some "Grey Plovers."


Green Plover.

_Rathlin Island._--April 16th, eight remained in vicinity two days;
26th, seven, remained all day.

_Innishtrahull._--March 5th, Lapwing Plover. May 10th, ditto.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 7th, hundreds of Green Plover; 14th, ditto.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 10th, two; 11th, forty flying S.W.; 12th to 18th,
several; frost.

_Rockabill._--Dec. 16th, Green Plover going S.

_Copeland Island._--Nov. 9th, some flocks of Lapwings on island during
this month.

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 28th, six. Dec. 2nd, seven; 10th, 11th, 13th,
and 16th, flocks.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 12th, twelve Lapwings; first seen this season.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 5th, three; 20th, one. Nov. 5th, one.

_Killybegs._--Oct. 3rd, eight Lapwings. These were in neighbourhood all
the summer.

_Oyster Island, North._--Dec. 1st, twenty-five Lapwings; 12th, ten.

_Slyne Head, North._--Nov. 10th, two.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 11th, small flocks; 15th, large flocks; 17th, some;
30th, very large flocks. Dec. 15th, several.


Turnstone.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 11th, eight.


"Sea Larks."

_Blacksod._--July 12th, twelve Sea Larks.

_Howth Baily._--Jan. 6th, 1883, seven "Sand Larks" on strand.

_Rockabill._--Nov. 3rd, "Sand Larks."

_Innishtrahull._--Aug. 12th, six or eight "Sand Larks," and daily
during winter.

_Arranmore._--Oct. 20th, one "Sandpiper." Nov. 4th, one.


Seapie.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 13th, four "Sepoys," 4.30 p.m., wind strong
S.W.; 26th, six "Sepoys." June 2nd and 10th, several "Sepoys."

_Howth Baily._--Jan 6th, 1883, flock of eighty to one hundred "Sepoys"
flying about cliffs.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 6th, flock of twelve "Sepoys."

_Oyster Island, North._--Oct. 9th, seven remained some time. Dec. 31st,
several.


Heron.

_Blacksod._--June 7th, three to five "Cranes." Seldom seen here.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 10th, one; 12th, one.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 8th, one at lake. Dec. 5th, one "Crane."

_Samphire Island._--Oct. 27th, two. Seldom seen here.

_Skelligs._--Dec. 11th, one going E.

Dungarvan.--Jan. 16th, 1883, one flying seaward.


Curlew and Whimbrel.

_Galley Head._--May 8th, flocks of from ten to twenty "May-birds," or
Curlew, going N.

_Mine Head._--May 3rd, nine "May-birds."

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--May 6th and 8th, eight to ten "May-birds"
flying N.W.

_Rathlin Island._--May 2nd, 5 a.m., ten Curlews; 8th, eight Curlews;
12th, ten May-birds or Curlews. Seen also on June 3rd, 21st, and 29th
going S.

_Innishtrahull._--March 5th, seen. April, in flocks. May, some seen. In
June and July, the only birds which visit the island, except sea-birds.

_Lough Swilly._--May 16th and 17th, flocks of "Whimbrel Curlew."

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 13th, one Curlew. A few seen on March 25th,
and from June 2nd to 8th.

_Oyster Island, North._--May 3rd to 7th, fifteen to twenty "young
Curlews, commonly called May-birds."

_Blacksod._--April 5th, about twenty Curlews going N.W.; April 9th,
twelve birds seen; 18th, several flocks. May 13th to 22nd, continuous
flocks passing inland. A few on July 5th and 20th.

_Slyne Head, North._--April 11th, flock of Curlews. May 3rd, one flock
known by the name of "May-birds" in this locality. "They resemble
the Curlew in form and colour, but not so large; they remain in this
locality for two or three months each year, and are rarely seen before
May." They departed early in July this year; 10th, one flock of Curlews
going S. July 21st, flocks of Curlews.

_Slyne Head, South._--May 17th, nine "May-fowls" flew to N.E.; 30th,
five ditto.

_Valentia._--During April frequently, and May 13th, 16th, 25th. On May
13th the entry is "young Curlew" (perhaps Whimbrel).

_Skelligs._--Jan. 8th, ten Curlews going S.

_Dursey Island._--May 2nd to 7th, Curlews at intervals going N.W.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 13th, flocks of 200 to 300 Curlews, first
arrived on this day.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 6th, fifteen Curlews; 10th, thirty; 12th to 18th,
several; frost. Jan. 15th, 1883, large flock.

_Copeland Island._--Sept. 21st, large flocks of Curlews.

_Rathlin Island._--Aug. 3rd, seven Curlews; 12th, five; 21st, three.
Sept. 2nd, seven; 20th, twelve. Oct. 25th, six. Dec. 7th, eight; and at
intervals to end of month.

_Innishtrahull._--Aug. 12th, flocks of ten or twelve, and daily during
winter.

_Dunree Head._--Dec. 11th, great flock of Curlews passed.

_Lough Swilly._--Oct. 5th, Curlews in flocks; Oct. 9th, 12th, Nov. 1st,
30th, Dec. 6th and 14th, ditto.

_Killybegs._--Sept. 5th, about seventy Curlews; they remained until
middle of October, some during winter months.

_Oyster Island, North._--Nov. 11th, about fifty; remained on island.
Seen also on Dec. 12th, 31st; and Jan. 9th to 13th, 1883.

_Clare Island._--Nov. 3rd, thirty going N. Dec. 22nd, large flocks.
Jan. 10th, 1883, large flocks.

_Arran Island, North._--Dec. 9th, four; 16th, seven.

_Straw Island._--Sept. 30th, twenty-five "young Curlews." Nov. 27th.
twenty.

_Arran Island, South._--Curlews always on island.

_Samphire Island._--Oct. 11th, three passing inland.

_Valentia._--"Curlews at all times here."

_Skelligs._--Oct. 3rd, six going N. Dec. 19th, eight.

_Dursey Island._--Entries occur in September at frequent intervals.
Oct. 3rd, 26th, and Dec. 14th and 17th.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 21st, large flocks.


Woodcock.

_Slyne Head, South._--May 7th, two Woodcocks, 11 a.m. None struck
lantern for last six months.

_Skelligs._--Jan. 19th, two Woodcocks perched on island.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Nov. 20th, three Woodcocks. Dec. 5th, five; 6th,
twenty; 7th, eighteen; 8th, ten; 9th, twenty.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 6th, one; 12th, one; 14th, one.

_Rathlin Island._--Dec. 13th, Woodcocks.

_Arranmore._--Nov. 12th, one. Dec. 10th, four.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Dec. 17th, one.

_Killybegs._--Nov. 5th, two killed. Dec. 10th, three (shot two).

_Arran Island, South._--Oct. 26th, three. Nov. 20th, two.

_Skelligs._--Dec. 14th, two.

_Dursey Island._--Dec. 11th, two going S.E.

_Dungarvan._--Dec. 11th, two.


Snipe.

_Slyne Head, North._--March 12th, 4 a.m., one Snipe killed against
lantern.

_Slyne Head, South._--May 16th, three Snipe, 7 a.m.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Nov. 4th, ten Snipe. Dec. 6th, thirty; 9th, sixty
Snipe; 15th, sixty to one hundred.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 12th, two.

_Innishtrahull._--Oct. 6th, one. Nov. 7th, two; 19th to end of month,
some frequented island.

_Lough Swilly._--Dec. 14th, two.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 5th, one. Dec. 11th, five.

_Arranmore._--Dec. 10th, 11th, and 16th, a few.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Dec. 16th, two; 17th, six.

_Skelligs._--Dec. 15th, four. Jan. 5th, 1883, one; 8th, two.


Corn Crake.

_Mine Head._--May 1st, first heard in the night.

_Tuskar Rock._--Aug. 22nd, one Corn. Crake going N.W. The third seen
here for the last two and a half years.


Waterhen.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 15th, Waterhen seen; plentiful on a lake
near.

_Rockabill._--Dec. 12th, Waterhen.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 16th, one "Moorhen."


Coot.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 15th, Coot seen; plentiful on a lake near.


Geese.

_Innishtrahull._--Feb. 13th, Barnacles in flocks of from twelve to
twenty, from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. "These birds passed more or less during
this month, but particularly on the 13th."

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 21st, eight Barnacles. Have not seen
Barnacles at this time of year before. They left next morning.

_Oyster Island, North._--Feb. 21st to 26th, large flocks of Barnacles,
seen between 8 and 10 p.m. Noticed passing against the rays of light.
They all left the neighbourhood.

_Broadhaven._--April 5th and 16th, Barnacles seen going N.; 9th and
15th, Geese going N.

_Howth Baily._--Jan. 9th, 1883, thirteen Barnacles or Wild Geese flying
E.

_Copeland Island._--Dec. 18th, three flocks of Wild Geese passed over
island, going inland.

_Rathlin Island._--Dec. 18th and 26th, two Wild Geese.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 5th, three Barnacles flying S.E.

_Dunree Head._--Oct. 10th, flock of Barnacles passed up lough; 20th,
great flock of Wild Geese passed. Nov. 7th, Barnacles. Dec. 21st, flock
of Wild Geese.

_Lough Swilly._--Nov. 2nd, two flocks of Wild Geese going S.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 17th, one Wild Goose.

_Arranmore._--Nov. 12th, one Barnacle. Dec. 8th, one; 9th, thirty-two;
18th, several.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Nov. 8th, seven Barnacles; 14th, four. Dec. 10th
and 26th, several.

_Killybegs._--Nov. 13th, nineteen flying S., very high; 16th, two
flocks flying S. Dec. 4th, seventeen going S.

_Oyster Island, North._--Sept. 21st, twelve Barnacles going S.; 26th,
thirty going S. Oct. 5th and 8th, several flocks going S.; 17th, 20th,
25th, ditto. Nov. 5th, 20th, Dec. 25th, flocks passing into harbour.

_Broadhaven._--Dec. 2nd, thirteen Wild Geese.

_Clare Island._--Oct. 20th, a large flock of Wild Geese going S.

_Slyne Head, North._--Nov. 10th, seven Barnacles. Dec. 7th, fifteen.

_Samphire Island._--Oct. 7th, Barnacles in large numbers in the bay,
and continued plentiful up to date of sending schedule, Jan. 15th, 1883.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 15th, five Wild Geese; 16th, four going E. Dec.
11th, seven.


Swans.

_Lough Swilly._--"June 1st to 3rd, some Wild Swans on lake in
neighbourhood; unusual at this season."

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 22nd, seven White Swans. "Remained on island
some hours till two were shot."

_Killybegs._--Dec. 14th, six Swans flying south at a great height.


Ducks.

_Copeland Island._--March 14th to 28th, Teal and Widgeon seen at
intervals in small flocks of four to ten, passing over station from
mainland, going N.E. or towards Scotch coast.

_Broadhaven._--April 5th, five Wild Ducks going N. May 13th, two Wild
Ducks going N.W.

_Blacksod._--April 8th, eleven.

_Clare Island._--March 3rd, large flock. April 2nd, four large flocks;
14th, two flocks. In these three cases birds going S. or S.W. On June
26th, Wild Ducks going N.

_Galley Head._--Nov. 18th, some Ducks coming to the bogs.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 13th, twenty-six Teal Ducks, six "Black
Ducks," one shot. "These Ducks, I know, are not native of this country."

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Dec. 7th, twenty Wild Ducks flying S.;
10th, flock of thirty Widgeon ditto.

_Tuskar Rock._--Nov. 14th, seven Sheldrakes killed striking.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 7th, a flock of Widgeon (supposed);
19th, flock of Ducks. Nov. 12th, ditto. Dec. 29th, four Ducks.

_Howth Baily._--Oct 29th, eight Wild Ducks. Dec. 12th, three. Jan.
14th, 1883, six Widgeon.

_Copeland Island._--Oct. 8th, continuous flocks of Ducks passing over
island and going inland, three to twelve in each flock.

_South Maidens._--Sept. 10th, a flock of Sheldrakes.

_Rathlin Island._--Sept. 25th, two Teals.

_Innishtrahull._--Sept. 8th, one shot; 9th, two seen. Oct. 6th, Teal,
two. Nov. 7th, Wild Duck shot. Dec. 10th, two to four; 21st, one.

_Dunree Head._--Nov. 7th, Wild Duck; 16th, flock of Widgeon.

_Tory Island._--Nov. 7th, Sheldrake shot, wind S., stormy. Dec. 9th,
one Wild Duck.

_Killybegs._--Sept. 19th, thirteen Wild Ducks; remained about until
sending in schedule in January.

_Oyster Island, North._--Oct. 17th, flocks of Widgeon; 25th, large
flocks. Dec. 18th, large flock.

_Broadhaven._--Nov. 25th, six Wild Ducks.

_Straw Island._--Nov. 25th, forty Ducks. Dec. 5th, twenty-five. Jan.
9th, 1883, thirteen.

_Arran Island, South._--Nov. 17th, twenty Wild Ducks.

_Samphire Island._--Oct. 7th, Duck; 18th, twenty.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 13th, five; 18th, fifty. Dec. 11th, Ducks and Teal,
several; 24th, several flocks of Teal. Jan: 3rd, 1883, thirty Wild
Ducks.


Merganser.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 18th, three flying into bay; 28th, ten swimming
towards land. Dec. 26th, two.


Northern Diver.

_Skelligs._--June 1st, one Northern Diver in the water.

_Tuskar Rock._--Jan. 11th, 1883, one Northern Diver. The "Black Divers"
leave here about May 1st, and begin to return in October.

_Howth Baily._--Dec. 5th, one Northern Diver swimming about; 14th,
ditto.

_Clare Island._--Dec. 27th, three Northern Divers.


Guillemot.

_Tearaght._--First seen on Feb. 21st. Commence to lay about May 20th.

_Skelligs._--Feb. 12th, forty Guillemots going N. March 27th, flocks
going N. Numbers about island during April, May, and June.

_Tearaght._--Jan. 8th and 9th, 1883, about a dozen.

_Skelligs._--Aug. 1st, flock departing. Oct. 31st, flock seen going S.
Nov. 10th, flock fishing.


Puffin.

_Galley Head._--Continuous flocks on Feb. 27th, March 18th and 21st,
and from April 10th to 30th, also during May; in all cases going W.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--May 14th, continuous flocks; also on 16th and 20th,
going N.; after May 20th to end of month going S.

_Oyster Island, North._--March 13th, several flocks of Puffins in the
bay. May 18th to 24th, several flocks.

_Broadhaven._--June 18th to 20th, flocks of Puffins. A few on June 30th
and July 12th.

_Eagle Island, West._--June, large numbers of Puffins.

_Black Rock, Mayo._--From April 20th to Aug. 15th, large numbers of
Puffins at intervals.

_Blacksod._--April 18th, thirty Puffins. June 16th, eleven Puffins
going S.E.

_Clare Island._--March 22nd, continuous flocks of Puffins going S.W.
April 4th, ditto, going S.

_Slyne Head, North._--April 10th, continuous flocks of Puffins arrived
during day. June 17th, large and continuous flocks of Puffins have
arrived in vicinity.

_Straw Island._--April 14th, 150 Puffins or Sea Parrot, 5.10 a.m.

_Tearaght._--April 1st, the Puffin arrived, a few only; 5th, they
completely covered the island this day.

_Skelligs._--March 23rd, flocks of Puffins about island. Numbers around
island to end of June (date of sending schedule).

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Nov. 15th, flocks flying S.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Dec. 13th to 16th, continuous flocks flying
E. and S.

_Howth Baily._--Puffins disappeared about middle of December.

_Dunree Head._--Aug. 17th, flocks.

_Killybegs._--Oct. 30th, 100 to 150 Puffins; they were here during the
summer and up to this date.

_Slyne Head, North._--A few Puffins at intervals to Nov. 7th.

_Arran Island, North._--Nov. 8th, twenty Puffins.

_Straw Island._--Oct. 23rd, thirty.

_Skelligs._--Aug. 5th, flocks departing.


Razorbill.

_Skelligs._--March 28th, flock of Razorbills; continued about the
island during April, May, and June. Aug. 1st, flock departing. Jan.
3rd, 1883, flock going S. A few on Jan. 9th and 11th fishing.


Cormorant.

_Black Rock, Mayo._--April 20th to Aug. 15th, two to six Cormorants;
they breed on coast.

_Blacksod._--April 27th, Cormorants seen all day.

_Dursey Island._--A few Cormorants seen on April 11th, 27th, May 20th,
June 22nd.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Nov. 9th, two Cormorants remained around ship.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 5th, Cormorants to be seen frequently; they
breed on a rock near the mainland called the Stark.

_Tory Island._--Dec. 10th, four Cormorants.

_Arran Island, North._--A few seen ab intervals; last entry, Oct. 2nd.

_Straw Island._--Dec. 22nd, eleven.

_Samphire Island._--Oct. 19th, four.

_Valentia._--At intervals during October and November resting on rock.


Gannet.

_Galley Head._--Continuous flocks are noted on the following
dates:--Feb. 27th, March 5th to 13th, 21st, April 10th to 30th, and in
June. In every instance where the direction of flight is entered, they
were going W.

_Arklow Bank, South._--Small flocks, two to twelve birds in each,
are noted as frequently passing from April 1st to June 7th, going in
various directions, generally N.E.

_Kish Light-ship._--May 5th, one seen; 14th, two seen.

_Copeland Island._--Flocks between April 1st and 16th, two to twenty
birds in each, pass daily, all going N.

_Rathlin Island._--Flocks at intervals between April 6th and June 28th;
most numerous in the end of May and June. Direction of flight either E.
or W.

_Lough Swilly._--Flocks at intervals between April 29th and July 18th;
most in July.

_Arranmore._--Passing in June and July.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--At intervals from March 17th to July; generally in
small flocks of six to eight birds.

_Oyster Island, North._--A few Gannets seen on March 6th, and between
May 18th and 24th a large number of "both white and dark-coloured" (old
and young) were seen in bay.

_Broadhaven._--At intervals between April 9th and end of July,
generally ten to twelve in a flock. Most frequently in June and July.
Direction of flight variable.

_Eagle Island, West._--In March five or six flocks of Gannets coming
from S. In May, June, and July, numbers in the vicinity.

_Eagle Island, East._--Here the only birds seen were Gannets, which
passed daily during April and May every quarter or half-hour.

_Black Rock, Mayo._--Flocks from April 1st to June 1st.

_Blacksod._--April 17th, five Gannets. Seldom seen at this station.

_Clare Island._--Flocks noted on March 1st, and on June 11th.

_Slyne Head, North._--Seen on May 8th and June 3rd; large flocks, also
on April 4th and 9th.

_Slyne Head, South._--July 10th, continuous flocks of Gannets.

_Arran Island, North._--May 6th to 13th, flocks of Gannets appeared
going S.

_Straw Island._--April 28th, five Gannets.

_Valentia._--Seen April 1st, May 27th, and at intervals in June.

_Skelligs._--Constantly seen in the neighbourhood, the Lesser Skellig
being the only Irish breeding-station.

_Dursey Head._--At intervals during April, a few birds. Large flocks on
May 8th. Several birds on May 18th and July 10th.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Sept. 20th, twenty Gannets. On Jan. 11th, 1883,
"Gannets continue to pass South."

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Four or five at intervals between Nov. 21st
and Dec. 12th.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--During the month of November great numbers
of Gannets feeding about the' ship. Flocks noted on Dec. 3rd, 4th, and
5th, and five seen on 20th.

_Tuskar Rock._--"At any time of the year that fish are about the rock
Gannets are here."

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--A few on Oct. 18th and 23rd, going S.

_Copeland Island._--Gannets each day in vicinity during September,
after fish.

_Rathlin Island._--Flocks of Gannets frequently during August,
September, and October.

_Innishtrahull._--Gannets generally in summer months.

_Dunree Head._--Sept. 4th, great numbers passed into Lough Swilly;
18th, passed out of Lough.

_Lough Swilly._--Oct. 2nd and 4th, a number of Gannets in vicinity;
16th, ditto, old and young birds.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 12th, continuous flocks from E. to W. A few birds
seen on Oct. 21st and Nov. 9th.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Oct. 20th, continuous flocks going S.: 22nd,
hovering about all day.

_Killybegs._--Oct. 16th to 18th, rush of Gannets and Gulls: they
remained until middle of November, when they departed, taking a
south-westerly course.

_Eagle Island, West._--October, large numbers of Gannets flying to
the south. November, very few Gannets. December, Gannets have all
disappeared.

_Slyne Head, North._--At intervals during August, September, October,
November, and December.

_Arran Island, North._--From August to Nov. 20th, a few birds
occasionally.

_Straw Island._--Noted on Sept. 8th and Oct. 20th. Gannets remained in
vicinity of lighthouse longer than is usual.

_Tearaght._--To be seen daily in vicinity.

_Skelligs._--Observed almost daily during September and October;
continuous flocks from 25th to 31st of latter month. A few in November,
December, and January.

_Dursey Island._--A few during September and October.


Tern.

_Copeland Island._--May 18th, the "Sea Tern or Perr" arrived in large
flocks on this date to breed, and continued arriving up to June 1st.
There are some thousands of these birds on Mew Island, which is only
forty yards from Copeland; the hen bird sits three weeks on four eggs;
the eggs are sometimes laid on the bare rock.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--June 2nd, seven or eight Terns; they bred on an
island near this.

_Oyster Island, North._--April 9th to 12th, several Terns or Sea
Swallows to be seen in bay.

_Blacksod._--May 9th, five Sea Swallows going S.; 22nd, twenty Sea
Swallows.--June 22nd, six.

_Slyne Head, South._--June 4th, flocks of "small Sea Gulls with forked
tails" arrived; they did not breed this year as usual.

_Copeland Island._--Sept. 10th, large flock of Terns numbering some 400
left Mew Island, going N.


Gulls.

_Galley Head._--March 1st, coming to breed; 21st, continuous flocks of
small Gulls; also during April and May.

_Mine Head._--July 25th, fifty "Marsh Gulls" remained all day.

_Rathlin Island._--Large flocks of Gulls noticed frequently, during May
and June especially.

_Lough Swilly._--April 1st to 10th, Gulls in great numbers. May 11th
and 14th, three or four "Boatswain Gulls." June 20th, Gulls in great
numbers.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Large flocks of Gulls during months of April, May,
and June, at intervals; they build on an island near this.

_Oyster Island, North._--April 10th to 12th, large flocks of Gulls. May
18th to 24th, several flocks.

_Broadhaven._--April 15th, 26th; May 8th, 13th to 19th; June 5th and
17th; Skua Gulls observed; and at frequent intervals to date of sending
schedules.

_Eagle Island, West._--January and February, a few Sea Gulls. May and
June, large numbers.

_Blackrock, Mayo._--March 1st to May 1st, two to four "Royal Gulls" at
intervals; small flocks of Kittiwakes and large flocks of "Small Gulls
or Wheelons" also at intervals. During April and May one or two "North
American or Cream-coloured Gulls." I never see more than one or two of
these birds.

_Blacksod._--May 3rd, flock of large Grey Gulls all day; 7th, six Royal
Gulls going N.E. April 1st to June 1st, flocks of small white Sea Gulls
seen.

_Slyne Head, North._--March 28th, large and continuous flocks of Sea
Gulls going in a southerly direction.

_Slyne Head, South._--July 10th, continuous flocks of Skua Gulls and
some Royal Gulls after fish.

_Arran Island, North._--Gulls frequent during May and June, generally
going towards the large Island of Arran, where they breed. I am
informed they arrive in April and leave early in August.

_Valentia._--April 18th to end of May, at intervals; on many days no
bird is seen. From June 1st to 23rd, on rare occasions.

_Skelligs._--Feb. 2nd, twenty Common Gulls going N. March 22nd, flocks
of Kittiwakes; 31st, ditto. During April and May flocks of Kittiwakes
constantly about island. June, ditto.

_Dursey Island._--Large flocks of Gulls seen frequently during April,
May, and June.

_Galley Head._--Nov. 1st, the Large White and also the Grey-backed
Gulls that hatched here have left.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Sea Gulls to be seen here all the year round.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Nov. 12th, large flocks of Grey Gulls remained
around ship. Nov. 29th and Dec. 12th, flocks.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--During November, great numbers of Gulls.

_Rathlin Island._--Sept. 4th, "I may pass no remark on Gulls or
Gannets; they are here lying on the water or after fry I may say every
day." Nov. 24th and 26th, thousands of Skua Gulls on the sea.

_Dunree Head._--Aug. 10th to 17th, flocks of Gulls.

_Lough Swilly._--Oct. 16th, several flocks of Gulls; 21st, great
numbers. Nov. 1st, Gulls in great numbers. Dec. 7th, a number.

_Tory Island._--Nov. 9th, continuously in pairs. Dec. 11th, frequently.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Oct. 10th, continuous flocks. Oct. 28th, Nov. 2nd,
and to end of month, large flocks at intervals.

_Killybegs._--Oct. 16th to 18th, rush of Herring Gulls, and several
Black-headed and "Grey Gulls" after fry; remained until middle of
November, when all departed going S.W., except the Black-headed and
Grey Gulls, which remained.

_Broadhaven._--The Sea Gull is to be seen every day at this station.

_Slyne Head, North._--Gulls to be seen at all times.

_Arran Island, North._--Gulls at frequent intervals in August,
September, and October. Fewer entries in November and December.


_Straw Island._--Gulls noted in September and October. Jan. 3rd, 1883,
twenty-two Black-headed Gulls.

_Skelligs._--Aug. 26th, flocks of Kittiwakes departing. During
September and October almost daily, fishing up to Dec. 6th. No entry of
Kittiwakes afterwards, but a few "Gulls" entered at intervals.

_Dursey Island._--Aug. 28th, large flocks. A few in September and
October.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 22nd, "immense number of Gulls." Jan. 9th, 1883,
"great number of small Gulls"; 12th, one Gull of "a uniform drab
colour, very seldom seen in this locality."


Manx Shearwater.

_Skelligs._--April 5th, 10 p.m., wind N.E., clear, flocks of Manx
Shearwaters; these birds only appear at night; remained about island
during May and June. Nov. 6th, about twenty fishing.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Dec. 3rd, continuous flocks of "Mackerel
Cocks" flying W. [Manx Shearwaters?]; also on 4th and 5th; from 19th to
24th, several, generally going E.


Stormy Petrel.

_Skelligs._--June 2nd, flock flying about light, 11 p.m.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Nov. 8th, three Stormy Petrels remained near
ship all day.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--June 5th, 1882, two Stormy Petrels about the
ship all day.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 19th, one Petrel killed against lantern.

_Valentia._--Oct. 1st, two struck lantern, not killed; caught on
balcony after striking, wind strong S.W. Dec. 4th, one taken on
balcony, wind very strong.

_Skelligs._--Oct. 8th, caught two outside lantern.



WEST, NEWMAN AND CO., PRINTERS, 54, HATTON GARDEN, LONDON, E.C.



       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber Note

Minor typos were corrected.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT ON THE MIGRATION OF BIRDS IN
THE SPRING AND AUTUMN OF 1882 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
